Depression 
and College 
Students
Answers to 
college students’ 
frequently asked 
questions about 
depression
Feeling moody, sad, 
or grouchy? Who
doesn’t once in a while?
College is an exciting time, but it can also be very challenging. 
As a college student, you might be leaving home for the first 
time, learning to live independently, taking tough classes, 
meeting new people, and getting a lot less sleep. Small or large 
setbacks can seem like the end of the world, but these feelings 
usually pass with a little time.
But if you have been feeling sad, hopeless, or irritable for at least 
2 weeks, you might have depression. You’re not alone. Depression 
is the most common health problem for college students.Superscript of 1.
Fo otnote of 1: Buchanan, J. L. (2012). Prevention of depression in the college student population: A review of the literature. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 26(1), 21-42. doi:10.1016/j.apnu.2011.03.003. Retrieved July 31, 2015, from 
Footnote of 1: Buchanan, J. L. (2012). Prevention of depression in the college student popu
lation: A review of the literature. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 26(1), 21-42. doi:10.1016/j.apnu.2011.03.003. Retrieved July 31, 2015, from http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0883941711000379. (End of footnote).
 You 
should know:
Ê Depression is a medical illness. 
Ê Depression can be treated.  
Ê Early treatment is best.
Ê Most colleges offer free or low-cost mental health 
services to students.
Q: What is depression?
A: Depression is a medical illness with many symptoms, including
physical ones. Sadness is only a small part of depression. Some people with 
depression may not feel sadness at all, but be more irritable, or just lose 
interest in things they usually like to do. Depression interferes with your 
daily life and normal function. Don’t ignore or try to hide the symptoms. It is 
not a character flaw, and you can’t will it away. 
Q: Are there different types of 
depression?
A: Yes. The most common depressive disorders include major
depression (a discrete episode, clearly different from a person’s usual 
feeling and functioning), persistent depressive disorder (a chronic, low-
grade depression that can get better or worse over time), and psychotic 
depression (the most severe, with delusions or hallucinations). Some 
people are vulnerable to depression in the winter (“seasonal affective 
disorder”), and some women report depression in the week or two prior to 
their menstrual period (“premenstrual dysphoric disorder”). You can learn 
about these and other types of depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/
health/topics/depression/index.shtml.
Q: What are the signs and 
symptoms of depression?
A: If you have been experiencing any of the following signs and 
symptoms nearly every day for at least 2 weeks, you may have major 
(sometimes called “clinical”) depression:
Ê Persistent sad, anxious, or “empty” mood
Ê Feelings of hopelessness, pessimism
Ê Feelings of guilt, worthlessness, helplessness
Ê Loss of interest or pleasure in hobbies and activities
Ê Decreased energy, fatigue, being “slowed down”
Ê Difficulty concentrating, remembering, making decisions
Ê Difficulty sleeping, early-morning awakening, or oversleeping
Ê Appetite and/or unwanted weight changes
Ê Thoughts of death or suicide; suicide attempts
Ê Restlessness, irritability
Ê Persistent physical symptoms, such as muscle pain or headaches. 
Not everyone who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some people 
experience only a few symptoms. Some people have many. If any of these 
symptoms is interfering with your functioning—or if you are having thoughts 
that life is not worth living or ideas of harming yourself— you should seek help 
immediately; it is not necessary to wait 2 weeks.
Q: What should I do if someone I 
know is considering suicide?
A: If you know someone who is considering suicide, do not leave him or 
her alone. Try to get your friend or loved one to seek immediate help from 
his or her doctor, campus security, the student health service, or the nearest 
hospital emergency room, or call 911. Remove any access he or she may have 
to firearms or other potential tools for suicide, including medications. You 
can also call to seek help as soon as possible by calling the Lifeline at 
1-800-273-TALK (8255).
Q: Where can I learn more 
about depression and other 
mental health issues?
A: The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) website
(http://www.nimh.nih.gov) provides information about various mental health 
disorders and mental health issues. On the website, you can also learn about 
the latest mental health research and news. The website is mobile-friendly. 
This means you can access the NIMH website anywhere, anytime, and on 
any device—from desktop computers to tablets and mobile phones.
You can also follow NIMH on Twitter (@NIMHgov), YouTube  
(https://www.youtube.com/user/NIMHgov), Facebook, Google+,  
and LinkedIn. 
NIMH sometimes hosts live Twitter chats and other social media events on 
various mental health issues. For more information about past and upcoming 
events, visit the NIMH website (http://www.nimh.nih.gov).
National Institute
of Mental Health
NIH Publication No. 15-4266
Q: What are “co-occurring” 
disorders?
A: Depression can occur at the same time as other health problems, such as 
anxiety, an eating disorder, or substance abuse. It can also co-occur with other 
medical conditions, such as diabetes or thyroid imbalance. Certain 
medications—for example, those for the treatment of severe acne—may cause 
side effects that contribute to depression; although some women are very 
sensitive to hormonal changes, modern birth control pills are not associated 
with depression for most users. 
Q: If I think I may have depression, 
where can I get help?
A: If you have symptoms of depression that are getting in the way of your 
ability to function with your studies and your social life, ask for help. Depression 
can get better with care and treatment. Don’t wait for depression to go away by 
itself or think you can manage it all on your own, and don’t ignore how you’re 
feeling just because you think you can “explain” it. As a college student, you’re 
busy—but you need to make time to get help. If you don’t ask for help, depression 
may get worse and contribute to other health problems, while robbing you of the 
academic and social enjoyment and success that brought you to college in the first 
place. It can also lead to “self- medication” with high-risk behaviors with their own 
serious consequences, such as binge drinking and other substance abuse and 
having unsafe sex.
Most colleges provide mental health services through counseling centers, 
student health centers, or both. Check out your college website for information. 
If you think you might have depression, start by making an appointment with a 
doctor or health care provider for a checkup. This can be a doctor or health care 
provider at your college’s student health services center, a doctor who is off- 
campus in your college town, or a doctor in your hometown. Your doctor can make 
sure that you do not have another health problem that is causing your depression.
If your doctor finds that you do not have another health problem, he or she can 
discuss treatment options or refer you to a mental health professional, such as a 
psychiatrist, counselor, or psychologist. A mental health professional can give you a 
thorough evaluation and also treat your depression.
If you have thoughts of wishing you were dead or of suicide, call a helpline, such 
as 1-800-273-TALK (8255), for free 24-hour help, call campus security or 
911, or go to the nearest emergency room.
q: How is depression treated
A: Effective treatments for depression include talk therapy (also called 
psychotherapy), personalized for your situation, or a combination of talk 
therapy and medication. Early treatment is best. 
Q: What is talk therapy?
A: A therapist, such as a psychiatrist, a psychologist, a social worker, or
counselor, can help you understand and manage your moods and feelings. You 
can talk out your emotions to someone who understands and supports you. You 
can also learn how to stop thinking negatively and start to look at the positives in 
life. This will help you build confidence and feel better about yourself as you begin 
to work with your therapist to find solutions to problems that may have seemed 
insurmountable when you were feeling depressed and maybe even hopeless. 
Research has shown that certain types of talk therapy or psychotherapy can help 
young adults deal with depression. 
These include:
Ê Cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT, which focuses on thoughts, behaviors, 
and feelings related to depression  
Ê Interpersonal psychotherapy, or IPT, which focuses on working on relationships 
Ê Dialectical behavior therapy, or DBT, which is especially useful when 
depression is accompanied by self-destructive or self-harming behavior. 
All therapies can be adapted to each person’s issues, for example, if depression 
is associated with an anxiety or eating disorder. Your college counseling center 
may offer both individual and group counseling. Many also offer workshops 
and outreach programs to support you. 
Read more about talk therapies at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/
psychotherapies.
Q: What medications 
treat depression?
A: If your doctor thinks you need medication to help your depression, he 
or she may prescribe an antidepressant. There are a number of antidepressants 
that have been widely studied and proven to help. If your doctor recommends 
medication, it is important to see your doctor regularly and tell him or her about 
any side effects and how you are feeling, especially if you start feeling worse or 
have thoughts of hurting yourself. Although the doctor will attempt to “match” 
the best medication for your depression, sometimes it takes a little “trial and 
error” to find the best choice. If you or a close family member has done well on a 
particular medication in the past, that can be a good predictor of success again.
Always follow the directions of the doctor or health care provider when taking 
medication. You will need to take one or more regular doses of an 
antidepressant every day, and it may not take full effect for a few weeks. To 
avoid having depression return, most people continue taking medication for 
some months after they are feeling better. If your depression is long-lasting or 
comes back repeatedly, you may need to take antidepressants longer.
Although all antidepressants can cause side effects, some are more likely to cause 
certain side effects than others. Tell your doctor if you are often “sensitive” to 
medication; starting with a low dose and increasing it slowly to a full therapeutic 
level is the best way to minimize adverse effects. You may need to try more than one 
antidepressant medicine before finding the one that improves your symptoms 
without causing side effects that are difficult to live with.
Read more about medications for depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/
health/topics/mental-health-medications/mental-health-medications.shtml.
Q: What else can I do?
A: Besides seeing a doctor and a counselor, you can also help your depression by 
being patient with yourself and good to yourself. Don’t expect to get better 
immediately, but you will feel yourself improving gradually over time.
Ê Daily exercise, spending time outside in nature and in the sun, and eating 
healthy foods can also help you feel better. 
Ê Get enough sleep. Try to have consistent sleep habits and avoid all-night 
study sessions.
Ê Your counselor may teach you how to be aware of your feelings and teach 
you relaxation techniques. Use these when you start feeling down or upset.
Ê Avoid using drugs and at least minimize, if not totally avoid, alcohol.
Ê Break up large tasks into small ones, and do what you can as you can; try 
not to do too many things at once.
Ê Try to spend time with supportive family members or friends, and take 
advantage of campus resources, such as student support groups. Talking 
with your parents, guardian, or other students who listen and care about 
you gives you support.  
Ê  Try to get out with friends and try fun things that help you express yourself. 
As you recover from depression, you may find that even if you don’t feel like 
going out with friends, if you push yourself to do so, you’ll be able to enjoy 
yourself more than you thought.
Remember that, by treating your depression, you are helping yourself succeed 
in college and after graduation.
Q: What are the warning signs 
for suicide?
A: Depression is also a major risk factor for suicide. The following are 
some of the signs you might notice in yourself or a friend that may be reason for 
concern.
Ê Talking about wanting to die or to kill oneself
Ê Looking for a way to kill oneself, such as searching online or buying a gun
Ê Talking about feeling hopeless or having no reason to live
Ê Talking about feeling trapped or in unbearable pain
Ê Talking about being a burden to others and that others would be better off 
if one was gone
Ê Increasing the use of alcohol or drugs
Ê Acting anxious or agitated; behaving recklessly
Ê Giving away prized possessions
Ê Sleeping too little or too much
Ê Withdrawing or feeling isolated
Ê Showing rage or talking about seeking revenge
Ê Displaying extreme mood swings.
Q: What should I do if I am 
considering suicide?
A: If you are in crisis and need help, call this toll-free number, available 24
hours a day, every day: 1-800-273-TALK (8255). You will reach the National 
Suicide Prevention Lifeline, a service available to anyone. You may call for 
yourself or for someone you care about, and all calls are confidential. You can 
also visit the Lifeline’s website at http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org.
