What is Psychological First Aid (PFA)?
Psychological First Aid is a concept that 
can be traced to an article published by the 
American Psychiatric Association in 1954 
which acknowledged the need for an acute 
intervention to alleviate human stress “of a 
severity and quality not generally encountered 
… due to the ‘forces of nature or from enemy 
attack’.”1 Since that time, many researchers 
and health organizations, including the 
National Institute of Mental Health,2 
the Institute of Medicine,3 and the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services,4 
have supported the idea that early, brief and 
focused intervention can reduce the social 
and emotional distress of children and adults 
after traumatic events.   
This Helpful Hints publication will discuss the 
use of PFA in schools, specifically, the U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security’s “Listen, 
Protect, Connect—Model & Teach” (LPC) 
crisis response strategy. It will explore goals 
of the strategy, when and how PFA can be 
implemented by schools, when PFA should be 
implemented—including considerations to keep 
in mind when implementing—and the type of 
training school staff need to effectively use this 
strategy. 
HELPFUL HINTS
FOR SCHOOL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Vol. 3, Issue 3, 2008
U.S. Department of Education—Readiness and Emergency Management for Schools (REMS) Technical Assistance Center
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID (PFA) FOR STUDENTS AND TEACHERS:  
LISTEN, PROTECT, CONNECT—MODEL & TEACH
READINESS AND EMERGENCY 
MANAGEMENT FOR SCHOOLS
TA CENTER
READINESS AND EMERGENCY 
MANAGEMENT FOR SCHOOLS
TA CENTER
1
The widespread use of Psychological First Aid (PFA) is evidenced by the fact that the Inter-Agency 
Standing Committee (IASC), an international humanitarium assistance forum, has developed 
Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings that recommend, 
“All aid workers provide very basic psychological first aid.” The IASC guidelines further define the 
components of PFA to include the following actions:
Protect survivors from further physical or psychological harm;
•	
Identify and provide support for those most distressed;
•	
Reestablish social supports:
•	
-	
Keep families together and facilitate reunion with loved ones, and 
-	
Reunite friends, teachers and return students to school;
Provide information and linkage with local resources;
•	
Return to school and familiar routines;
•	
Facilitate communication among families, students and community agencies;
•	
Educate those affected about the expectable psychological responses, and basic coping tools, 
•	
to stressful and traumatic events;
Listen patiently in an accepting and nonjudgmental manner and convey genuine compassion;
•	
Identify basic practical needs and ensure that these are met;
•	
Ask for people’s concerns and try to address these;
•	
Encourage participation in normal daily routines (if possible) and use of positive means of 
•	
coping; and
As appropriate, refer to locally available support mechanisms or to trained clinicians.
•	
5
2
Listen, Protect, Connect: An Evidence- 
Informed Model 
In keeping with IASC’s guidelines, LPC is a 
family or series of PFA strategies focusing 
on children, parents, families and community 
members. LPC uses parents, teachers, 
primary care and “neighbor-to-neighbor” 
providers to give basic psychological support.6  
A version of PFA specifically designed 
for children to be used by educators and 
other adult staff in schools is available.7  In 
the immediate aftermath and during the 
early phases of recovery in this version, 
“Psychological First Aid for Students and 
Teachers: Listen, Protect, Connect—Model & 
Teach,” (hereafter, LPC—Model & Teach) is 
a five-step crisis response strategy designed 
to reduce the initial distress of students or 
adults and to help students return to school, 
stay in school and resume their learning.8 It 
is not a single session recital of events, but 
a model that can guide the interactions of 
students and educators over time through the 
process of their recovery. Students may need 
to tell their stories many times in different 
settings (individually, in a small group or after 
significant events that remind them of loss, the 
trauma or the anniversary of the tragedy) or 
not tell their story at all depending on factors 
regarding the event and the characteristics of 
the student. Teachers, counselors and other 
adults can use their discretion to apply these 
guiding principles in a flexible manner.      
The two main goals of PFA for students and 
teachers are: 
To stabilize the emotions and behaviors of 
1.	
students; and
To return students to an improved mental 
2.	
and emotional state after a crisis or disaster 
ready to attend school and reengage in 
classroom learning. 
These goals promote the focus of teachers’ 
actions on fulfilling the mission of education.   
How to Implement PFA for Students and 
Teachers
LPC—Model & Teach is a five-step program 
that gives educators guidelines on how to 
speak with students who have experienced 
a crisis or disaster. Each step is formulated 
to help teachers reduce student distress 
and facilitate students’ return to classroom 
learning. The steps are based on a model of 
cognitive learning that helps students put their 
experiences and feelings into words, provides 
adult support and encouragement, engages 
students in practical problem solving, models 
calm and optimistic behavior and teaches 
students about how traumatic stress affects 
human behavior.  
LPC—Model & Teach also has a built-in triage 
tool (from the evidence-based PsySTART rapid 
triage system)9 to help educators, community-
based services, mental health supports and 
others who deal with children to help determine 
2
Risk Factors That May Indicate A Counseling 
Referral Is Needed for a Student Include:
Loss of a family member, schoolmate or friend
•	
Fear for their lives, observing serious injury or 
•	
the death of another person
Family members or friends missing after the 
•	
event
Getting sick or becoming hurt due to the event
•	
Home loss, family moves, changes in 
•	
neighborhoods, changes in schools or loss of 
belongings
Being unable to evacuate quickly
•	
Past traumatic experiences or losses
•	
Pet loss
•	
Past history of post-traumatic stress disorder 
•	
(PTSD), anxiety or mood disorders coupled 
with any of the above
If a student has any of these experiences you may 
wish to consider referring him or her to your school 
psychologist, counselor or social worker. 
Excerpted from: Schreiber, M., Gurwitch, R., & Wong, 
M. (2006). Listen, Protect, Connect—Model & Teach: 
Psychological First Aid (PFA) for Students and Teachers. 
(Accessed online Oct. 16, 2008, at http://www.ready.gov/kids/
parents/index.htm.)
which children may:
Need immediate referral to a school or 
1.	
other mental health professional for a 
potential mental health emergency; or
Benefit from basic psychosocial support 
2.	
as provided by the Protect and Connect 
steps of LPC—Model & Teach and other 
supportive means.
This built-in triage component of LPC—Model 
& Teach points educators to the issues that 
may be most challenging for a particular 
student. Triage calls for educators to observe 
for certain risk factors (see “Risk Factors 
That May Indicate A Counseling Referral Is 
Needed for a Student Include” on page 2). If 
a quick triage indicates one of the risk factors, 
then an educator should refer the student 
to a professional with training in treatment 
of trauma in the lives of children. If risk 
factors are not significant enough to warrant 
a referral, then the educator can proceed 
with the first step in LPC—Model & Teach 
and continue to monitor for risk indicators 
and behaviors that may emerge. Should a 
teacher make a referral, he or she can still 
utilize LPC—Model & Teach principles to 
provide support when the student experiences 
behavioral or emotional difficulties in the 
classroom.
Step 1: Listen
During step one, teachers or adult school staff 
should provide students with an opportunity to 
share their experiences and express feelings 
of worry, anxiety, fear or other concerns 
about their safety. The LPC—Model & Teach 
strategy is a flexible approach that allows 
educators wide latitude to speak with students 
individually or in small formal or informal 
groups. Speaking with students can occur 
one-on-one if a teacher and student find 
themselves in a relatively private place to talk. 
Listening can also occur in a group setting. 
The teacher can open the discussion by 
acknowledging what has happened and letting 
students know that it is okay to share their 
experiences, and establishing that the school is 
a safe place to do this. The teacher can begin 
the discussion with one of the sample “Listen” 
questions (see box below). Whenever possible, 
if conducting this step in a group setting, be 
aware of who is in this group. Children who 
have experienced a direct loss due to the event 
may benefit more from a one-on-one initial 
listening session or with a group that also has 
experienced the loss.  
Listening is a step that continues throughout the 
PFA process. Listening can occur in a formal 
setting, such as a classroom or homeroom, but 
it also may take place when students gather 
in the halls, before, or after school. Adults 
should respond encouragingly to students’ self-
expression, conveying interest and empathy, 
and responding with support to both verbal and 
nonverbal cues.     
Adults can acknowledge the difficulty students 
may be having, but should avoid making 
judgments and predictions, such as “You’ll 
get over it,” or “Only the strong survive.” 
It is important to validate the students’ life 
experiences. Another caveat to educators during 
this phase is not to probe students for more 
details than they are willing to share, but to 
respect students’ wishes not to share thoughts 
or feelings. Forcing students to go over their 
experiences in too much detail, especially 
immediately after the crisis, can re-traumatize 
the student and may cause more emotional and 
psychological distress to themselves and to 
others who may hear additional details about the 
event.
Rather, the adult should convey interest, 
empathy and availability, and let students 
know they are ready to listen. In addition, 
3
Sample “Listen” Questions
Where were you when this crisis happened?
•	
What do you remember about that day?
•	
4
adults should provide extra reassurance and 
encouragement at this point to stay in school 
rather than at home. Teachers and other 
school personnel may worry about “saying or 
doing the wrong thing,” but being available just 
to listen, reflecting back students’ concerns, 
and being open to discussion will serve as 
examples to students of how adults deal with 
difficult situations. Knowing they have a place 
where adults care and listen will increase the 
students’ perception that school is a positive 
experience, and will facilitate their return to the 
learning environment.  
Step 2: Protect
For this second step in the LPC—Model 
& Teach intervention, adults should try to 
reestablish students’ feelings of both physical 
and emotional safety. They can honestly inform 
students about events surrounding the crisis, 
such as sharing with them information about 
what is being done in the community and 
school to keep everyone safe. This information 
should be provided in a developmentally and 
age-appropriate manner. In the classroom, 
or around school, adults should maintain 
structure, stability and predictability, and make 
efforts to reestablish routines, expectations 
and rules. For example, bell schedules 
should return to normal as soon as possible. 
If shortened days are required, keep them 
to a minimum. Traumatized students may 
experience more confusion when disruption 
comes to their school routines, including after-
school activities, by changes to their regular 
schedules. Concerns about separation from 
parents or caregivers are frequently children’s 
paramount concern. Parents can help stabilize 
children’s reactions by resuming mealtime, 
homework, and bedtime routines as well as 
community or church activities disrupted by the 
crisis or emergency.
It is also important at this phase to protect 
students from further physical harm or 
psychological trauma. Adults should try to keep 
the environment free of anything that could re-
traumatize students, such as showing videos 
of similar tragedies or exposing students to 
news stories that have repeated reminders of 
the crisis or disaster, particularly for younger 
students. Research after the bombing of the 
federal building in Oklahoma City found a 
strong relationship between the amounts of 
time spent watching bombing related coverage 
and the numbers of post-traumatic stress 
reactions that children reported months after 
the event.10
Adults also should be on the lookout for 
negative or trauma-related behaviors, which 
can include repetitive play or talk involving 
aspects of the traumatic event being 
proliferated in the classroom or around school. 
Other behaviors may include increased 
irritability, oppositional and defiant behaviors, 
withdrawal, poor attention and concentration, 
and difficulty learning new material. While 
some students may become the target of 
bullying, be aware that other students may 
become the bullies. Despite the adults’ 
assumption that students in distress may seek 
and receive support from peers, there will be 
students who use the tragedy as fodder for 
bullying. Although students will need extra 
patience and attention after a crisis, schools 
can increase students’ sense of safety and 
security when rules and routines regarding 
appropriate behavior, including disciplinary 
consequences, are reestablished.
Above all, adults should treat students’ fears, 
worries, and other concerns with respect, and 
4
Sample “Protect” Questions
Use these questions to help elicit what the student 
fears or worries are about after a disaster:
What is the most difficult thing to deal with 
•	
right now? 
Are you worried about how you are reacting? 
•	
Are you worried about your safety? Around 
•	
other students? Around adults at school or 
outside of school? 
provide help that is supportive and discreet. 
For example, it would be inappropriate to 
announce to the class that “Jimmy is having 
a hard time getting his work done in the 
classroom and needing to leave class to go to 
the counselor because he can’t stop thinking 
about the crisis.” Or, “Jimmy is not going to the 
class play tonight because he is afraid of the 
dark since the crisis occurred.” Adults should 
find ways instead to help students get the 
support they need in a manner that preserves 
their dignity and privacy.  
Step 3: Connect 
One of the most common reactions to trauma 
or fear is emotional and social isolation and 
the sense of loss of social supports. It can 
occur automatically, without students or 
adults realizing that they are withdrawing 
from their teachers or peers, respectively. The 
third objective of LPC—Model & Teach is to 
help students reestablish their normal social 
relationships and stay connected to others in 
order to experience social support. Restoring 
and building connections promotes stability, 
recovery and predictability in students’ lives. A 
student’s classroom and school is a safe place 
to begin restoring normalcy during a crisis or 
disaster. Through the eyes of children, adults 
can identify the “systems of care” that are 
part of their everyday life, move from beyond 
the classroom and school to the family and 
then to other community anchors including 
preexisting faith and cultural supports. This 
objective serves to help students reconstitute 
the relationships between the key community 
systems or “anchors” in their lives.
Teachers or other school staff that reach 
out and check in with students on a regular 
basis can do this reconstitution, sometimes 
several times a day (see sample “connect” 
questions on the right). Students also can be 
encouraged to interact, share activities and 
take on team projects with other students, 
friends or teachers. If necessary, teachers and 
staff can refer students to school counselors. 
Parents can be encouraged to consult the LPC 
information specifically tailored for parents and 
caregivers, available at http://www.ready.gov/
kids/_downloads/PFA_Parents.pdf.
As time passes, adults should keep track of 
what is going on in students’ lives, and engage 
in an ongoing dialogue on these happenings. 
By sharing positive feedback with others 
in the students’ lives and with the students 
themselves, teachers and other adults also 
can provide a positive boost to students’ 
feelings of confidence that they can handle 
their reactions related to the event. With this 
type of interaction, students feel the caring and 
consistent support of adults in their lives, even 
during a difficult time of coping. 
Encourage parents to share with school 
personnel any concerns they may have about 
their children’s reactions after the event. Over 
time, such communication should be a goal—to 
balance concerns about students as well 
as to share students’ accomplishments and 
strengths. By engaging in open communication 
and sharing information, important adults can 
track the progress of students’ recovery.   
Step 4: Model Calm and Optimistic Behavior
In times of crisis or disaster, children and 
adolescents watch adult reactions and receive 
cues on how to confront adversity. This step 
of LPC—Model & Teach reminds adult staff in 
schools that they are role models for children. 
While teachers and other school personnel 
also will be affected and may not know 
5
Sample “Connect” Questions
These questions are not meant to be intrusive or 
probing, but are gentle inquiries as to what others 
can do to help the student return to school, stay in 
school and do well in school.
What can I do to help you right now? 
•	
What can your teachers do to help?
•	
What can your friends do to help?
•	
What can your family do to help?
•	
6
exactly how they will navigate recovery from 
disasters themselves, adults can acknowledge 
their distress but demonstrate a positive and 
optimistic approach and show students that 
constructive actions provide hope for the future. 
It is demonstrating that adults can effectively 
cope with the stress despite the fear or loss 
they experience that is important to children. 
This type of social support from adults can be 
extremely powerful in children’s recovery from 
difficult events. Students will follow the example 
set by teachers and parents—watch how 
they react and how they cope with adversity, 
particularly during and after stressful events.    
Adults can model calm and optimistic behavior 
in many ways, including the following: 
Maintain level emotions and reactions with 
•	
students to help them achieve balance;
Take constructive actions to assure student 
•	
safety, such as engaging in a safety drill to 
remind them of how to stay safe, or planning 
a project that improves the physical or social 
climate of the school;
Express positive thoughts for the future, 
•	
like “Recovery from this disaster may take 
some time, but we’ll work on improving the 
conditions at our school every day;” and
Help students to cope with day-to-day 
•	
challenges by thinking aloud with them about 
ways they can solve their problems.     
Step 5: Teach
During the coping process, it is important to 
help students understand the range of normal 
stress reactions. School counselors, nurses, 
psychologists or social workers can take on this 
task. These professionals can teach students, 
staff, parents or guardians, and volunteers 
about common reactions to the specific event 
or disaster, such as the fact that children and 
youths may have more difficulty with learning 
after the specific event. They can help students 
become familiar with the range of normal 
reactions that can occur immediately after a 
traumatic event or disaster, (see “Possible 
Reactions of Children After Disasters” on page 
8), such as:
Physical changes;
•	
Emotional changes;
•	
Cognitive changes; and
•	
Changes in spiritual beliefs.
•	
Teachers also can acknowledge a few of the 
common reactions that affect learning and 
introduce the need for a nurse or counselor to 
provide the classroom with more information. 
For example, teachers could say, “After the 
crisis we have experienced, many students 
may have trouble sleeping and or with their 
attention and concentration. Knowing this, I 
understand that learning new materials that 
we are covering may be a bit more difficult. 
We are going to take step-by-step. We will 
review a little more than usual to be sure we 
all have it. I have confidence that together we 
can learn what we need. If you need extra 
help, let me know. We could also ask our nurse 
(psychologist, counselor, social worker) to 
give a short lesson about the usual ways that 
people react to a crisis and give us examples 
of how to cope with that stress a little better.”
Adults also should ensure accurate information 
or “risk communication” about new safety 
measures, drills, and ways of staying safe is 
conveyed to students. Knowledge helps build 
resilience and increases the sense of ability to 
cope.    
Sample “Teach” Questions
Professionals can also teach children specific 
ways of coping, including:  
Practice relaxation breathing
•	
Skills that help a child get back to school, stay 
•	
engaged in learning and develop new work 
abilities
Different ways to express feelings and 
•	
experiences
6
7
Children also may benefit from the experience 
of helping with recovery efforts. Teachers 
and other school personnel often serve as 
a resource for various types of information, 
programs and school or community activities. 
After a disaster, students and families may 
continue to turn to educators for guidance. 
The school, for example, may sponsor a 
poster campaign related to preparedness 
and resilience or participate in a disaster 
preparedness or safety fair in the community. 
Bake sales can raise money for recovery 
efforts. Other examples include older students 
helping to replant trees in areas devastated 
by wildfires, serving as volunteers to box food 
or clothing donations, engaging in cleanup 
efforts around the school or conducting home 
or community or letter-writing or drawing 
campaigns for rescue and recovery personnel. 
In some events, letter-writing or drawing 
campaigns for rescue and recovery personnel 
are schoolwide activities. Children’s drawings 
given to emergency responders often 
become treasured possessions. Providing 
information to students and their families 
about opportunities for students, families and 
volunteers to participate in recovery activities 
in the school and community is another 
important role adults can serve and can help 
in the students’ overall recovery.
All adults must remind students and parents 
that resuming normal routines, including 
returning to regular school attendance and 
activities, is important to recovery. By using 
their everyday teaching skills, educators can 
help students develop constructive solutions 
for returning to school after a crisis or disaster, 
like how to go to school, stay in school and 
do well in school, and rely on the support of 
friends and family. 
When to Implement LPC—Model 
& Teach
Implement PFA, and specifically the LPC—
Model & Teach program, for students after 
7
any disaster, school crisis or emergency. Since 
children can exhibit any range of behaviors 
after such an event, including those that are 
difficult to observe externally and require self-
report, it is important to anticipate their 
possible needs and begin the LPC—Model & 
Teach program immediately following a crisis.
Developmental Concerns When 
Implementing LPC–Model & Teach
Post-traumatic stress can cause a range of 
reactions in youths (see “Possible Reactions of 
Children After Disasters” on page 8); however, 
certain responses are more likely with specific 
phases of child development, and therefore 
certain coping techniques are more appropriate 
for specific age groups. Consider incorporating 
the following age-specific strategies for coping 
with students’ psychological reactions in the 
five steps of the LPC—Model & Teach to help 
alleviate stress-related symptoms:
Preschool age through second grade (3–6 
years old)
Encourage expression through play or 
•	
drawing.
Recognize that students may need more 
•	
patience, attention and help with daily 
activities.
Provide verbal reassurance of safety and 
•	
physical comfort.
Remind parents to maintain calm and 
•	
comforting play, meal and bedtime routines. 
Remind parents to monitor adult 
•	
conversations and exposure to media 
coverage of the crisis. Children can take 
in traumatic information from casual adult 
conversation or from television left on as 
“background” while adults walk in and out of 
the room.
Elementary school age (5–11 years old)
Allow students to retell the event and its 
•	
effect on them through writing activities, art 
or music. End the session with a discussion 
8
of how students can help to make things 
better at home, at school or in the 
community.
Recognize that students’ attention and 
•	
concentration may be impaired and affect 
their learning. To address this, teach 
stress management techniques, such 
as controlled breathing and relaxation. 
Review the most recently acquired lessons 
before introducing new material. 
Involve students in planning and 
•	
implementing a regular safety drill.
Discuss and develop simple class activities 
•	
or projects that express concern for the 
victims and survivors and contribute to 
recovery in the community. 
Maintain discipline measures for 
•	
aggressive behavior at home or school. 
Do not rationalize bullying or aggressive 
behaviors “because they have been 
through so much.” 
Remind parents to monitor adult 
•	
conversations and exposure to media 
coverage of the crisis.
Middle and high school age (12 years old 
and up)
Encourage students to resume social 
•	
activities, athletics and club participation.  
Encourage involvement in constructive 
•	
community, church or other volunteer 
projects to lessen feelings of helplessness. 
Involve students in planning and 
•	
implementing a regular safety drill.
Encourage, but do not insist on, discussion 
•	
of the event or fears with trusted teachers, 
counselors, peers or family members. 
NOTE: Among all age groups, post-traumatic 
stress can take the form of somatic complaints, 
such as stomachaches, headaches or general 
malaise. The school nurse should check out these 
symptoms. If no physical ailment is detected, 
proceed with involving the student(s) in the LPC—
Model & Teach intervention.   
8
Possible Reactions of Children After 
Disasters
Emotional Reactions
Increased worries or fears about safety of 
•	
self or others
Increased worries or fears about security
•	
Worries or fears about separation
•	
Worries or fears about reoccurrence of event
•	
Worries about ongoing situation
•	
Feelings of guilt or blame
•	
Feelings of helplessness
•	
Attitude of seeming not to be effected
•	
Behavioral Reactions
Changes in school attendance or 
•	
performance
Decreased concentration
•	
Decreased attention
•	
Changes in sleep
•	
Changes in appetite
•	
Changes in mood (swings)
•	
Changes in activities
•	
Increased irritability
•	
Increased anger outbursts or temper 
•	
tantrums
Increased withdrawal
•	
Regression in behavior
•	
Cognitive Reactions
Repeated questions about the event
•	
Repeated discussion or story-telling about 
•	
event
Repetitive play about the event
•	
Misattributions and misperceptions about 
•	
event 
Increased interest in media coverage 
•	
Trauma reminders (those things that are 
•	
similar to sights, thoughts, sounds, tastes, 
smells, etc. that were present at the time of 
the traumatic event)
Loss reminders (those things that serve to 
•	
remind individuals about what and/or who 
they have lost because of the disaster or 
trauma)
Physiological Reactions
Increased sensitivity to sound
•	
Increased startle response
•	
Increased somatic complaints including: 
•	
headaches, stomachaches, fatigue, vague 
aches and pains
9
Discuss what students have heard from 
•	
others or seen through media coverage, 
correct misattributions and misperceptions.
Help students to understand aggressive or 
•	
withdrawn behaviors are an effort to numb 
responses or cope with anger or fear.
Seek immediate assistance by following 
•	
protocols in your school’s crisis response 
plan if students show serious warning 
signs of suicide, violence, shame, guilt or 
plans for revenge.         
PFA can be helpful to many students after 
a crisis or emergency. However, if a student 
exhibits the following behaviors after a post-
disaster period of four weeks or longer, the 
student may need further help, such as a 
referral to a school or community mental 
health professional. These behavioral 
changes include:   
Statement(s) about feeling suicidal; 
•	
Interruption of daily physical functions 
•	
for an extended period, (e.g., disrupted 
sleeping, eating); 
New, disruptive behaviors in the 
•	
classroom, school grounds or home from 
students who were previously compliant 
or prolonged and increased levels of 
disruptive behaviors among students who 
have had discipline problems prior to the 
crisis or disaster; 
Refusal to attend school;
•	
Continued or increasingly severely 
•	
symptoms such as depressive mood  or 
anxieties that do not improve;
Prolonged fear of separation from 
•	
caregivers;
Repeated statements about wanting to join 
•	
a deceased parent or loved one;
High-risk or dangerous behavior, such 
•	
as acting out sexually, using or abusing 
substances, driving recklessly, or a 
combination of these;
Repetitive play or talk in which the student 
•	
seems to be reenacting the events alone 
or with friends over and over without 
resolution;11, 12, 13
Changes in a previously positive parent-child 
•	
or teacher-student relationship; 
The stress symptoms are highly upsetting to 
•	
the student or parent(s); or
Any of the risk factors leading to triage 
•	
described in “Risk Factors That May Indicate 
A Counseling Referral Is Needed for a 
Student Include” on page 2.
Staff Training for PFA: LPC—Model & 
Teach
School counselors, psychologists and social 
workers can teach PFA in schools effectively 
generally within an hour to school staffs as part 
of the training for the recovery phase of school 
emergency management. The training should 
touch briefly on the history and rationale for 
PFA, underscoring the fact that children and 
adolescents are far more vulnerable to traumatic 
stress, anxiety, fear and confusion than adults 
are after crises or disasters. In addition, 
the training must address adult reluctance 
to intervene or even to speak with child or 
adolescent survivors of crises or disasters 
because of common feelings that “I don’t know 
what to say and I’m afraid I’ll make it worse.” 
The training should conclude with a review 
of the five phases of PFA for students and 
teachers: Listen, Protect, Connect, Model and 
Teach, including how to implement these phases 
and ideas for teaching basic coping skills to 
students.
Conclusion
PFA requires a mindset that is open to hearing 
students’ points of view. Every adult in the 
school, regardless of title or position can play 
an important role in crisis recovery if they follow 
the five-step LPC—Model & Teach process and 
possess the following qualities:
Ability to establish rapport quickly;
•	
Ability to listen to difficult feelings and 
•	
experiences of others and to empathize and 
be supportive;
Discretion about the sensitive information 
•	
that students share;
9
10
Notes
1. Everly, G.S., Phillips, S.B., Kane, D. and Feldman, D. (2006). “Introduction to and Overview of
	
Group Psychological First Aid.” Brief Treatment and Crisis Intervention 6(2):130-136. Accessed 	
	
online Dec. 3, 2008, at http://brief-treatment.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/6/2/130. 
2. National Institute of Mental Health. (2002). Mental Health and Mass Violence: Evidence-Based
	
Early Psychological Interventions for Victims/Survivors of Mass Violence. A Workshop to 	
	
	
Reach Consensus on Best Practices. NIH Publication No. 02-5138. Washington, DC: National 		
	
Institute of Mental Health.
3. Institute of Medicine. (2003). Preparing for the Psychological Consequences of Terrorism: A Public 		
	
Health Strategy. Washington DC: The National Academics Press.
4. New Freedom Commission on Mental Health. (2003). Achieving the Promise: Transforming Mental 	
	
Health Care in America. Final Report. (No. SMA-03-3832). Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of 		
	
Health and Human Services.
5. Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) (2008). IASC Guidance on Mental Health and
	
Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings. Geneva: IASC. Accessed online Oct. 16, 		
	
	
2008, at http://www.humanitarianinfo.org/iasc/pageloader.aspx?page=content-documents-	
	
	
default&bodyid=5. 
6.  The University of California, Los Angeles School of Public Health’s Center for Public Health 
	
and Disasters has developed two psychological first aid guides: Listen, Protect and Connect: 
	
Psychological First Aid for Children and Parents, and Listen, Protect, Connect—Model &
 	
Teach: Psychological First Aid for Students and Teachers. Both LPC versions are available on 
	
http:www.ready.gov, the public national preparedness Web site of the U.S. Department of 	
	
	
Homeland Security.
7. Schreiber, M., Gurwitch, R., & Wong, M. (2006). Listen, Protect, Connect—Model & Teach: 	 	
	
	
Psychological First Aid (PFA) for Students and Teachers. Accessed online Oct. 16, 2008, at 
	
http://www.ready.gov/kids/parents/index.html.
8. Ibid.
10
Awareness of limitations, biases, personal thoughts and feelings about the event; and 
•	
Awareness of the need for self-care.
•	
Some adults find it very difficult to listen to the pain of children or youths who have suffered injury, 
abuse, physical or emotional trauma or loss. But when tragedy or loss strikes a school, educators 
and other staff are often the “first responders” who can help calm student fears, reestablish a 
climate of safety and restore the classroom learning environment through the use of PFA and the 
use of the Listen, Protect, Connect—Model & Teach intervention.
This newsletter was produced by the REMS TA Center, and authored by Marleen Wong, Assistant Dean and Clinical Professor, 
University of Southern California, School of Social Work; Merritt Schreiber, Psychological Programs, UCLA Center for Public 
Health and Disasters; and Robin Gurwitch, Program Coordinator, National Center for School Crisis and Bereavement and 
Professor of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center.
The REMS TA Center was established in October 2007 by the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Safe and Drug-Free Schools. 
The center supports schools and school districts in developing and implementing comprehensive emergency management 
plans by providing technical assistance via trainings, publications and individualized responses to requests. For additional 
information about school emergency management topics, visit the REMS TA Center at http://rems.ed.gov or call 1-866-540-
REMS (7367). For information about the REMS grant program, contact Elizabeth Argeris (Elizabeth.Argeris@ed.gov), Tara Hill 
(tara.hill@ed.gov), Michelle Sinkgraven (michelle.sinkgraven@ed.gov) or Sara Strizzi (sara.strizzi@ed.gov).
This publication was funded by OSDFS under contract number ED-04-CO-0091/0002 with EMT Associates, Inc. The contracting 
officer’s representative was Tara Hill. The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the 
Department of Education, nor does the mention of trade names, commercial products or organizations imply endorsement 
by the U.S. government. This publication also contains hyperlinks and URLs for information created and maintained by private 
organizations. This information is provided for the reader’s convenience. The Department of Education is not responsible 
for controlling or guaranteeing the accuracy, relevance, timeliness or completeness of this outside information. Further, the 
inclusion of information or a hyperlink or URL does not reflect the importance of the organization, nor is it intended to endorse 
any views expressed, or products or services offered. All hyperlinks and URLs were accessed October 2008.
11
9. PsySTART is an evidence-based rapid mental health triage tool and system that uses brief, 
	
“objective” indicators to help determine which children may need crisis intervention, prompt 
	
intervention or follow up using evidenced based risk indicators. It is included in the American 
	
Red Cross Psychological First Program and several state, local, and national “best practice” 
	
recommendations. Excerpted from Schreiber, M. (2005). “Learning from 9/11: Toward a 
	
National Model for Children and Families in Mass Casualty Terrorism.” Cited in Y. Daneli & 
	
R. Dingman (Eds.), On the Ground After September 11: Mental Health Responses and 
	
Practical Knowledge Gained (pp.605–609). New York: Haworth Press.
10. La Greca, A. M., & Silverman, W. K. (2006). “Treating Children and Adolescents Affected by 	
	
	
Disasters and Terrorism.” In P. Kendall (Ed.), Child and Adolescent Therapy: Cognitive-	 	
	
	
Behavioral Procedures (pp. 356–382). New York: Guilford Press.
11. Nader, K., Pynoos, R. & Fairbanks, L. (1990). “Children’s PTSD Reactions One Year After a 	
	
	
Sniper Attack at Their School.” American Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 1526–1530.
12. Pynoos, R. S. (1993). “Traumatic stress and developmental psychopathology in children and 	
	
	
adolescents.” Review of psychiatry, 12, 205–238
13. Vogel, J. M., & Vernberg, E. M. (1993). “Part 1: Children’s Psychological Responses to 	 	
	
	
Disasters.” Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, 22(4), 464–484.
11
