Psychological First Aid 
for Young Peers
A handbook
Psychosocial Centre
CONTENTS
Introduction 
4
Why is Psychological First Aid helpful?	
5
PFA for young peers	
6
A. LOOK	
9
B. LISTEN	
9
C. LINK	 		
11
Do no harm	
13
Self-care and support  
14
Making referrals	
16
4
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID FOR YOUNG PEERS · A HANDBOOK
Introduction 
Learning about PFA as a young person unpacks what it means to be 
a compassionate friend and more! It strengthens your skills in being 
a good listener and in offering practical help to someone without 
making that person dependent. It increases your awareness about 
your own self-care too. And you get support as a PFA young peer so 
that you do not have to carry the task of helping someone alone.
This handbook and the two-day training on PFA linked with it give 
you the skills and knowledge to help others who may be in distress or 
in difficulty. As a result, you will have the confidence to reach out and 
offer personal support to your friends or more formally as a volunteer 
in response to an incident where help is needed by a National Society 
or other community group.
Why is Psychological First Aid (PFA) helpful?
PFA is a structured way of supporting someone who needs help. It 
involves caring about a person in difficulty, paying attention to their 
reactions and how they feel, listening to them, and if needed, 
providing practical help. It helps to make a young person in difficulty 
feel that someone is there for them who can support them. 
PFA skills include knowing:
•	 	how to approach someone who may need help
•	 	how people can feel in difficult situations 
•	 	how to calm someone who is distressed
•	 	how to help someone find the practical help they may need 
•	 	how to recognise severe signs of distress and to make referrals to 
the appropriate services.
PFA can be used to respond to a wide range of different problems and 
challenges. It is used in situations involving groups of people affected 
by large scale events such as after a major road accident, or after an 
extreme weather event such as high winds and floods damaging a 
school, or a humanitarian crisis where, for example, people have 
been forced to leave their home. These kinds of events would involve 
5
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID FOR YOUNG PEERS · A HANDBOOK
a response by a National Society (or other official responders) and 
PFA would be provided by volunteers under the coordination of the 
National Society.  
PFA can also be helpful in offering support on an individual basis. 
Situations may include young people having problems with friends, 
disruption in families caused by parents separating in difficult 
circumstances, pressures associated with school, college or work, con­
flict with parents, teachers or other adults in authority, issues 
associated with body image or being bullied, including on social 
media. There may be difficulties linked with relationships with 
•	 
PFA is…
•	 Helping someone in difficulty to feel safe and calm
•	 Finding out about what they need and what they are worried about
•	 Making sure they do not come to more harm or face danger
•	 Providing emotional support and being there for someone
•	 Helping someone to solve their immediate problem such as contacting 
someone known to them who can come to pick them up
•	 Helping someone to find out where to get the help they need from 
services in the community.

PFA is not…
•	 Something only professionals and experts can do
•	 Psychological therapy or counselling
•	 Asking someone to think about the reasons why things have 
happened, or what the deeper meaning is behind it
•	 Asking someone to tell every detail of what has happened to them
•	 Putting pressure on someone to share their feelings about what 
has happened to them.
6
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID FOR YOUNG PEERS · A HANDBOOK
partners or navigating the early stages of forming sexual and gender 
identity and sexual partnerships, or in relation to sexual or physical 
abuse including online violence and exposure to pornography. Young 
people may also be exposed to drugs and alcohol misuse. 
Young peers may provide PFA in these situations as a volunteer 
helper in school or in a community group or college, or sometimes 
as a friend. Young people are affected by these kinds of difficulties 
in many different ways depending on their age, culture, the supports 
they have available and their personality. They can experience stress 
or distress as a result of daily difficulties that happen or because of 
larger scale events such as described above. Reactions such as not 
being able to get a situation out of your mind or feeling anxious for a 
while about being with other people are natural reactions and are very 
common to most young people involved in abnormal events. If these 
reactions continue over a long period of time however, it is likely that 
specialist support is needed.
PFA for young peers
This package is for young people between the ages of 12 and 23 years. 
‘Peers’ are people of around the same age and stage who share the same 
kind of experiences, which makes it easy for them to understand one 
another. The definition used in the training is A peer is someone 
the same age as you, equal to you, someone with whom you 
share similarities.  
As you may know, between the ages of 12 and the early 20s, peer 
relationships are very important. Young people of the same age may 
find that they prefer to share their problems with their peers and 
friends rather than the adults around them.
The idea of this package is therefore that young peers can help and 
support each other by using PFA. Once you have done the PFA training 
you will be able to offer peer support in person, over the phone, or 
remotely, depending on the context or what feels right for the individuals 
involved.  
7
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID FOR YOUNG PEERS · A HANDBOOK
There are three key action principles in PFA which provide a helpful 
structure in offering help to someone in distress. They are LOOK, 
LISTEN and LINK. In the real world, helpers typically find that they 
move between each of these principles more than once before they 
complete the task of helping someone. 
The box below summarises what each principle means:
LOOK  for
•	 information on what has happened and is happening
•	 who needs help
•	 safety and security risks 
•	 physical injuries 
•	 immediate basic and practical needs 
•	 emotional reactions.
LISTEN  refers to how the helper
•	 approaches someone
•	 introduces oneself
•	 pays attention and listens actively 
•	 accepts others’ feelings
•	 calms the person in distress
•	 asks about needs and concerns 
•	 helps the person(s) in distress find solutions to their immediate 
needs and problems.

LINK  is helping people
 
•	 access information
•	 connect with loved ones and social support
•	 tackle practical problems 
•	 access services and other help.
8
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID FOR YOUNG PEERS · A HANDBOOK
CASE
A road accident
Johanna is on her way to school and sees a classmate, Bill, on a 
bike being hit by a car. The car does not stop. Bill is on the ground, 
crying. His bike has been badly damaged and his bag of books is all 
over the road. Johanna carefully runs across to Bill and waves the 
approaching cars to a stop. She looks to see how badly injured Bill 
is. He seems to have broken his arm, though Johanna is not sure. 
She moves the bike to the side of the road as quickly as she can 
and carefully helps Bill to the footpath. She calls an ambulance and 
then calls Bill’s parents. She speaks to Bill and tells him that help is 
coming. She asks him how he is feeling and if he needs anything. 
Johanna reassures Bill that help is on its way. She explains that she 
will stay with him until it arrives. She tells him his parents are also 
coming and that his bike is safe. Johanna gathers up all Bill’s books 
and puts them back in his bag. She keeps an eye on Bill to see 
how he is doing and if the pain is getting worse. The police and 
ambulance come and Johanna explains what has happened. Bill is 
taken to the hospital, but Johanna stays with the bike and waits 
for Bill’s parents to arrive. She explains what has happened and 
tells them which hospital Bill has gone to.
9
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID FOR YOUNG PEERS · A HANDBOOK
LOOK
The action priciple ‘Look’ refers to assessing:
•	 information on what has happened and is happening
•	 who needs help
•	 safety and security risks
•	 physical injuries 
•	 immediate basic and practical needs 
•	 emotional reactions.
A. LOOK 
In PFA, LOOK refers to how you look at a situation to see if it is safe 
to offer help. You have to assess what kind of help is needed and 
whether or not you can provide help. LOOK also means noticing how 
the person in distress is reacting. What is the best type of safe and 
effective support they need? 
B. LISTEN
In PFA, LISTEN refers to the way you communicate with a person in 
distress - from the moment you approach and start to interact with 
that person. It involves active listening. Listening is not only what we 
do with our ears. That is hearing. Listening is being present, paying 
LISTEN
LISTEN refers to how the helper
•	 approaches someone
•	 introduces oneself
•	 pays attention and listens actively 
•	 accepts others’ feelings
•	 calms the person in distress
•	 asks about needs and concerns 
•	 helps the person(s) in distress find solutions to their immediate 
needs and problems.
10
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID FOR YOUNG PEERS · A HANDBOOK
attention, and making sure you understand what the person is saying. 
It is listening to find out about what someone is feeling and what they 
need. It is being open, inquisitive, and sensitive to what the person 
is experiencing. For example, LISTEN can mean repeating back to 
someone what they have said, asking them if this is what they meant, 
and allowing them to speak.
CASE
Listening to a friend
David and Jae have been friends for years and go walking together 
every weekend. One day on one of their walks, Jae tells David that 
he has started to feel sad all the time. He cannot sleep as well as 
before, and he feels like he has nothing to look forward to. He feels 
hopeless. He says he has been pretending everything is fine, as he 
didn’t want to worry his friends or family. David is surprised to hear 
this, but listens while Jae gradually tells him about his problems. 
David does not ask lots of questions, but listens attentively, some­
times nodding his head to show Jae he is paying attention to what 
he is saying. He does not offer solutions, but asks Jae what he 
thinks would help him to feel better, and if there is anything he 
needs. David takes Jae home and makes him a hot drink before 
leaving him. 
That evening, David calls to see how things are, and tells Jae that 
he is there for whenever he needs to speak to someone. He asks if 
he can visit him the following day. As promised, David goes to Jae’s 
home and asks if there is anything which 
would help. 
Jae decides to speak to someone who can 
provide professional help, and they both l
ook for resources in the area which would 
suit. David offers to accompany Jae to the 
appointment when it is made and wait for 
Jae to come out. They agree to go to a 
café afterwards. David reminds Jae that 
he will be there for him as long as he 
needs. 
11
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID FOR YOUNG PEERS · A HANDBOOK
LINK
Link refers to helping the person in distress
•	 access information
•	 connect with loved ones and social support
•	 tackle practical problems 
•	 access services and other help.
C. LINK 
LINK actions mostly have practical outcomes. This involves you helping 
the person in distress to access information, connecting them with 
others or with other services where they can get more information. For 
example, LINK involves connecting people to loved ones and social sup­
port. LINK also means thinking about the inner resources that a peer and 
you are bringing to the situation. As an example, the ability to stay calm 
and focussed will help in managing a potentially challenging situation.
It is very important that you have information on local services and 
therefore there is a list at the end of this booklet giving contact details 
for referral. 
Signs of severe distress 
If a person in distress has strong emotional reactions that start to 
interfere with their daily functioning over a longer period of time, they 
should be referred for professional mental health support, if available. 
Signs of severe distress may include:
•	 When someone may not have been able to sleep for over a week 
and seem confused and disorientated. 
•	 When someone is so distressed that they are unable to function 
normally and care for themselves, for example by not eating or 
keeping clean, despite food and washing facilities being available.
•	 When someone loses control of their behaviour and behaves in an 
unpredictable and destructive manner.
•	 When someone threatens to harm themselves or others.
•	 When someone uses drugs or alcohol excessively. 
12
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID FOR YOUNG PEERS · A HANDBOOK
CASE
Shocking news
Ivan plays basketball every week. One day, Anna, one of the players, 
is called out of the training session to receive the news that her 
sister has been involved in a terrible accident. Anna is completely 
shocked and stunned. Her phone died as they were giving the 
details so she doesn’t know which hospital her sister has been 
taken to. Ivan leaves the game and goes over to Anna. He offers to 
call someone to help. He gets Anna’s emergency contact details from 
the basketball coach and calls that person to ask them to come 
to pick up Anna. He collects Anna’s belongings from the changing 
room and gets her a drink of water. He waits with her in a quiet 
corner away from the basketball game until her family arrives and 
stops a team member from taking a photo of Anna. While they 
are waiting, Ivan asks Anna how she is feeling. He listens to Anna 
speaking about how shocked she is. Anna is worried that her family 
will not come quickly.  Ivan reassures her that they are on the way, 
and asks her again if there is anything else she needs, if she would 
like him to call someone else. Ivan goes outside briefly to check 
whether the car is coming and when he sees it, he accompanies 
Anna to her family. 
13
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID FOR YOUNG PEERS · A HANDBOOK
Do no harm
It is really important to be aware that even from the best of intentions 
it is possible to cause harm when helping. The following considerations 
are therefore vital in offering PFA respectfully and responsibly: 
Respect the person’s trust and privacy:
•	 	If you break someone’s confidentiality, the person you are support­
ing may feel betrayed. However, if you are worried that the person 
is in danger, or is at risk to themselves or others, you may pass on 
their personal details to specialist services. 
Give emotional and practical support:	
•	 	Offer support within the boundaries of PFA. If you ask lots of probing 
questions about what happened, you may make the person feel 
more stressed.
Listen actively:	
•	 	If you become distracted by your phone or by something that is 
happening around you, the person will not feel listened to and 
respected. Active listening with attention on the person in distress 
is vital to PFA.
Be open to what the person is feeling and telling you: 
•	 	If you judge the person or tell them they have done something 
wrong, the person may feel guilty or ashamed, and will not feel able 
to ask for help. This will create a barrier to support being received.
Allow the person to make their own decisions:	
•	 	If you tell someone what to do to solve a problem or partronise 
them, it may not be the best solution for them. By helping the 
person to make their own decisions, you help them to be in control 
of their situation and find a solution which is right for them.
Be honest and trustworthy and say if you don’t know something:
•	 	Even though you may want to make everything better and fix a 
problem, it is important to be honest so that you do not raise 
someone’s hopes, or make them believe that something will 
happen when it may not.
14
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID FOR YOUNG PEERS · A HANDBOOK
Know when something is too difficult for you to handle:
•	 	Some problems are too big for one person to handle. Be honest 
about what you are capable of doing and do not overestimate your 
helping skills. This will make sure you do not become worried 
about your capacity to help, and the person will know exactly how 
you will support them.
Let people know they can ask for help later if they do not want help 
now:	
•	 	Sometimes people may not want help immediately. Let the person 
know you are there, and they can contact you at a later time. If you 
push someone to receive help when they are not ready, you may 
cause more stress and the person may feel pushed into doing 
something they do not want.
End your help respectfully:	
•	 If you stop helping too quickly or without explaining what other 
support is available and how the person can access it, the person 
may feel lost or confused.
Self-care and support
It is very important for helpers of any kind to look after themselves 
as well as the people they are helping. This is called self-care. This 
might seem like a strange idea but there is an expression, “You cannot 
pour from an empty cup”. This means that it is hard to be there for 
someone and offer friendship and help, if you feel drained or tired or 
burned out yourself. Everyone feels like that at times - it is not a sign 
of weakness. There are ways to stay happy and healthy and not be 
overstressed by offering help to others. 
For example, use the action principles of LOOK, LISTEN and LINK 
for your own self-care:
LOOK: Observe how you are feeling and how you respond to what is 
happening around you. Learn to recognise signs of stress or burn out 
in yourself.
15
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID FOR YOUNG PEERS · A HANDBOOK
LISTEN: Listen to how your reactions and inner feelings affect you. 
Sometimes you may have inner thoughts telling you that you don’t 
feel like doing something – you’re too tired or don’t feel motivated, 
or how unfair things are. Perhaps you feel physically unwell, perhaps 
your sleep is affected, perhaps you feel like spending more time alone, 
or you are becoming irritable with friends and family
Acknowledge and accept your feelings - they are real, and it is a very 
positive step that you have identified them!
Try to identify what is stopping you from doing things which help 
you to relax, or activities you enjoy. Maybe you have not yet identified 
any activities which could help, perhaps you can listen to yourself and 
your needs to try and find something to do which you enjoy and are 
good for you. Engage in activities that can help to protect your wellbe­
ing depending on what you like and what is accessible.
LINK: Link with others. Reach out to others for support. You could 
speak to your friends or peers about what is worrying you, or you 
could simply call or meet them for a chat or a shared activity such 
as a walk, a trip out, or some sporting activity you both enjoy. 
If you feel that you need to speak to someone in particular, or you 
need some more focused help, reach out for support. Perhaps you 
could invite a friend to help you do this.
As a young peer offering PFA, it is helpful to have a supervisor or 
mentor to be available to provide support.  This may be a teacher 
who is familiar with PFA or a National Society volunteer coordinator 
who is available on a regular basis to volunteers after they have been 
involved in responding to an incident. You should be clear about the 
kind of support being offered to you and how often you can access 
support. 
16
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID FOR YOUNG PEERS · A HANDBOOK
Making referrals*
The table below lists local services and includes contact details so 
that young peers can make referrals if needed. 
Referral services
Contact details
Emergency services
Police
Fire
Ambulance
Child protection services
Health services
Counselling services for 
young people
SGBV help and support
LGBTQIA+ counselling 
services
*Information on local services should be provided by the facilitators of the PFA training                        
which accompanies this handbook  
Psychological First Aid for Young Peers. A handbook
 
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 
Reference Centre for Psychosocial Support
Blegdamsvej 27 · DK-2100 Copenhagen · Denmark
Phone: +45 35 25 92 00  
E-mail: psychosocial.centre@ifrc.org  
Web: www.pscentre.org 
Facebook: www.facebook.com/Psychosocial.Center 
Twitter: @IFRC_PS_Centre
Author: Ruth O’Connell
Editor: Wendy Ager
Design: Michael Mossefin/Paramedia/13204 
Illustrations: Laetitia Ducrot 
Front page photo: Jesper Guhle
Suggested citation: Psychological First Aid for Young Peers: A handbook, IFRC Reference Centre 
for Psychosocial Support, Copenhagen, 2021.
© International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies Reference Centre for 
Psychosocial Support 2021
Translations and adaptations
Please contact the IFRC PS Centre if you wish to translate or adapt any part of Psychological 
first aid for young peers. A handbook. All endorsed translations and versions will be posted 
on the IFRC PS Centre website. If creating a translation or an adaptation, kindly note that if 
wishing to add your logo to the product, please contact the IFRC PS Centre for approval. In any 
use of the manual, there should be no suggestion that the IFRC PS Centre endorses any specific 
organisation, products or services. Please add the following disclaimer in the language of the 
translation: “This translation/ adaptation was not created by the IFRC Reference Centre for 
Psychosocial Support. The centre is not responsible for the content or accuracy of this 
translation.”
Psychosocial Centre
