Promoting 
Student Mental 
Health
A guide for UC faculty and staff
Promoting Student 
Mental Health
A GUIDE FOR UC FACULTY AND STAFF
UC Office of the President 
Student Affairs
2
Greetings
Across the nation and in the University of California system, more students 
are manifesting signs of emotional and psychological distress, reflecting 
a confluence of a multitude of factors affecting the current generation of 
students. The UC Student Mental Health Oversight Committee (SMHOC) 
serves as the system-wide leadership body which guides our coordinated 
efforts to addressing these issues. Together, we seek to:
1
	
Restore critical mental health services to fully respond 
to students in distress and at risk
2
	
Implement and augment targeted interventions through 
education, support and prevention programs, while 
restoring staffing levels in campus units best poised to 
assist high-risk students
3
	
Take a comprehensive institutional approach to 
creating healthier learning environments by enhancing 
the full spectrum of student life services, and revising 
administrative policies as well as academic practices 
that influence communication and collaboration 
around these issues.
3
We present this guide as a gift to all faculty and staff. As members  
of a caring community, all of us play important roles in nurturing  
the development of our students. This guide outlines important 
information about mental health and will help you examine the role you 
play in providing a supportive academic environment which includes 
assisting students who may be in distress. We encourage you to review 
this valuable resource and refer back to it when you find yourself in 
challenging situations.
STUDENT MENTAL HEALTH  
OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE, 2015/16
Thomas Parham (chair)
vice chancellor, student affairs
uc irvine
Claudia Covello
executive director,  
university health services 
uc berkeley
Michelle Famula
executive director,  
health and counseling services
uc davis
Janina Montero
vice chancellor, student affairs
ucla
Elizabeth Gong-Guy
executive director,  
campus and student resilience
associate clinical professor, 
psychology
ucla
Fuji Collins
assistant vice chancellor, 
health and wellness
uc merced
Susan Allen Ortega
assistant vice chancellor, 
health and wellness  
uc riverside
Karen Calfas
executive director,  
student health and well-being
uc san diego
Susan Rosen
executive director, student 
health and counseling services
uc san francisco
Jeanne Stanford
director, counseling and 
psychological services
uc santa barbara
Alma Sifuentes
associate vice chancellor/ 
dean of students
uc santa cruz
Gary Dunn
director, counseling and 
psychological services
uc santa cruz
Heather Macias 
graduate student 
representative
uc santa barbara
Siavash Zohoori 
undergraduate student 
representative
uc santa barbara
Regina Fleming-Magit
medical director,  
student health and counseling
uc office of the president
Jerlena Griffin-Desta 
deputy and executive director 
student affairs
uc office of the president
Taisha Caldwell-Harvey (staff)
mental health program 
manager
uc office of the president
Judy Sakaki (ex officio)
vice president, student affairs
uc office of the president
4
Acknowledgments
This manual is a compilation of writings and best practices from our 
colleagues at university Counseling Centers across the country and from 
our own UC Counseling Centers. We thank the many teams of clinical 
professionals whose combined efforts are reflected in this guide. We 
would also like to formally acknowledge the contributions of Cornell 
University. With permission, this text is an expansion on their works and 
best practices. Furthermore, it is our hope that this text, as a contribution 
to the accessible information found online, is used for future works in 
educational settings nationwide.
This manual was made possible through a collaboration between the  
10 University of California Counseling Center Directors and the UC Office  
of the President.
Special thanks to the following UC faculty and staff members who lent their 
time and expertise to provide content review and unique contributions.
Elizabeth Cheadle
dean of students
ucla school of law
Elizabeth Gong-Guy
executive director,  
campus and student resilience 
associate clinical professor, 
department of psychology 
ucla
Jeanne Manese
director, counseling center
uc irvine
Robert Moeller
professor, history
school of humanities 
uc irvine
Jeffrey Prince
director, counseling and 
psychological services
uc berkeley &
director, student mental 
health
uc san francisco 
Emil Rodolfa
retired director, counseling 
and psychological services
uc davis
project coordinator & editor:
Taisha Caldwell-Harvey
mental health program manager
uc office of the president
5
Sponsorship
This guide was funded as a project of the UC Student Mental Health 
Initiative through the California Mental Health Services Authority 
(CalMHSA). CalMHSA is an organization of county governments 
working to improve mental health outcomes for individuals, families and 
communities. Prevention and Early Intervention programs implemented 
by CalMHSA are funded through the voter-approved Mental Health 
Services Act (Prop 63). Prop. 63 provides the funding and framework 
needed to expand mental health services to previously underserved 
populations and all of California’s diverse communities.
Visit http://calmhsa.org to read more about CalMHSA.
Dedication
This guide is dedicated to the University of California students who have 
or who will struggle with emotional pain. May you find compassion and 
healing along your journey.
6
TABLE OF CONTENTS
01
RECOGNIZING STUDENTS  
IN DISTRESS
11	
Open Letter to UC Community
13	
Mental Health Trends
18	
Student Mental Health  
3-Tier Model
20	
Is This Guide For Me?
02
INDICATORS OF  
DISTRESS
25	
The Many Signs of Distress
26	
Academic Indicators
27	
Behavioral & Emotional 
Indicators
28	
Physical Indicators
28	
Other Factors
29	
Safety Risk Indicators
03
KNOWING WHEN AND  
HOW TO TAKE ACTION
33	
Knowing When and How to  
Take Action
34	
Choosing a Pathway
40	
A Collaborative System of Support
42	
Privacy Laws 
04
CULTURAL  
DIVERSITY 
49	
Our Diverse University
50	
Barriers to Help Seeking
51	
Various Communication Styles
52	
Intersectionality
54	
Students with Disabilities
58	
Student Veterans/Active ROTC/
Reserves
60	
LGBTQ-Identified Students
*Campus Insert (front pocket):  
Training, Education & Resources
7
05
RESPONDING TO DISTRESSED & 
DISTRESSING STUDENTS
67	
Synopsis of Student Concerns 
and How to Respond
69	
Emotional Distress
70	
Anxiety 
72	
Depression
74	
Suicide
78	
Grief & Loss
80	
Disordered Eating
82	
Poor Contact with Reality
84	
Responding to Emotionally 
Distressed Students
87	
Trauma & Abuse
88	
Sexual Assault/Sexual 
Violence
91	
Abusive Relationships
92	
Stalking/Harassment
95	
Hate Crimes
98	
Hazing
100	
Responding to Trauma & Abuse
103	
General Health & Wellness 
Distress
104	
Academic Difficulties
106	
Adjustment/Transitions
107	
Substance Abuse
109	
Self-Injury
111	
Responding to General Health 
and Wellness Distress
114	
Distressing & Disruptive 
Students
115	
Excessively Demanding/
Dependent
117	
Aggressive/Potentially Violent
119	
Responding to Distressing & 
Disruptive Students
06
SUPPORTING GRADUATE/
PROFESSIONAL STUDENTS AND 
POSTDOCTORAL SCHOLARS
125	
Graduate/Professional Students: 
A Vulnerable Population 
127	
Supporting Graduate and 
Professional Students
134	
Supporting Postdoctoral Scholars
07
WHAT CAN FACULTY & STAFF DO TO 
REDUCE STRESS
139	
Am I Causing Undue Stress?
142	
Helping Students Understand & 
Manage Stress
146	
Get to Know Your Students
147	
Fostering Cooperation vs. 
Competition
148	
Being Clear in Expectations and 
Communication
150	
Evaluate Students without 
Causing Undue Stress
152	
Opening Possibilities vs. Closing 
Doors
153	
Preparing Teaching Assistants 
to Be Most Effective
154	
Focusing on Strengths
156	
Faculty & Staff Testimonials
01
Recognizing 
Students in 
Distress
Recognizing Students in Distress
I’m so stressed over work all the time! 
Ahhhhhhhhhh! Please make it stop! 
Sometimes I consider suicide. It seems 
weird to actually say that word. Hah! 
But no, really, every time I cross a 
bridge here, I wonder what it would be 
like to jump. Maybe I’m just looking 
for attention? I haven’t told anyone. I 
doubt that anyone who is depressed and 
considering the ‘s’ word would go to 
counseling anyway. Does anyone notice 
that I’m suffering?”
—Anonymous Student
Recognizing Students in Distress
11
Open Letter to  
UC Community
Dear Faculty, Staff and Graduate Teaching/Research Assistants,
Has this ever happened to you?
A student comes to your office or class and is obviously 
intoxicated and disruptive?
A student reveals to you that they are having thoughts  
of suicide?
A student, who is usually well-prepared begins to miss class or 
meetings, fails to complete assignments and misses deadlines, 
and becomes inattentive to hygiene and personal appearance?
A student reveals that they were sexually assaulted, or is being 
stalked, or bullied? 
You learn a student is suffering discrimination and/or hostile 
treatment because of his/her sexual identity/gender identity?
RECOGNIZING STUDENTS IN DISTRESS
12
As a leader in the University of California community, you are in a unique 
position of being able to observe behavior that indicates a student may be 
experiencing distress. This manual is intended to provide education and 
guidelines to help you recognize and respond to these situations. Together, 
we can ensure that all our students have an opportunity to receive the 
appropriate support in their pursuit of academic excellence. Thank you in 
advance for taking the time to read through this guide in preparation for 
your important role in the lives of our students.
Warmly,
The UC Counseling Center Directors
Jeffrey P. Prince, Ph.D.
uc berkeley
Sarah Hahn, Ph.D.
uc davis
Jeanne Manese, Ph.D.
uc irvine
Nicole Green, Ph.D.
ucla
Myrla Seibold, Ph.D.
uc merced
Elizabeth Mondragon, Psy.D.
uc riverside
Reina Juarez, Ph.D.
uc san diego
Jeffrey P. Prince, Ph.D.
uc san francisco
Jeanne Stanford, Ph.D.
uc santa barbara
Gary Dunn, Ph.D.
uc santa cruz
13
Mental Health Trends
NATIONAL SPOTLIGHT ON MENTAL HEALTH
In June of 2013, President Obama and Vice President Biden hosted the 
National Conference on Mental Health at the White House as part of 
the Administration’s effort to launch a national conversation to increase 
understanding and awareness about mental health.
www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2013/06/03/national-conference-mental-health 
The conference brought together people from across the country, including 
mental health advocates, educators, health care providers, faith leaders, 
members of Congress, representatives from local governments and 
individuals who have struggled with mental health problems to discuss how 
we can all work together to reduce stigma and help the millions of Americans 
struggling in silence to recognize the benefits of reaching out for assistance.
Related to student mental health, President Obama’s fiscal year 2014 budget 
included a new initiative to help teachers and other adults recognize signs 
of mental illness in students, to support innovative state-based programs to 
improve mental health outcomes for young people and to help train 5,000 
additional mental health professionals with a focus on serving students and 
young adults.
The trend towards increasing resources for mental health services 
continued into 2016 as reflected in President Obama's budget which 
included a $56 million increase for the National Institute of Mental Health 
(NIMH) and a $44.6 increase for the Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration (SAMHSA).
14
Furthermore, in April of 2016, President Obama signed a proclamation 
designating May as National Mental Health Awareness Month and called 
upon citizens, government agencies, organizations, health care providers, 
and research institutions to raise mental health awareness and continue 
helping Americans live longer, healthier lives.
CALIFORNIA SPOTLIGHT ON MENTAL HEALTH
The Mental Health Services Act (Proposition 63)
In November 2004, California voters passed Proposition 63, the Mental 
Health Services Act (MHSA). Funds raised by Proposition 63 are to be 
used to transform the state’s public mental health system, expand it and 
revolutionize the existing system with a focus on promoting recovery-
oriented programs. Specific strategies for the following prevention and 
early intervention programs were outlined by the California Mental Health 
Services Authority (CalMHSA) and included:
•	
Suicide Prevention
•	
Stigma and Discrimination Reduction
•	
Student Mental Health
In 2011, the UC Student Mental Health Oversight Committee spearheaded 
collaboration between campus Counseling & Psychological Services and the 
UC Office of the President - Student Affairs to apply for funding under the 
student mental health strategy. This collaboration resulted in a proposal 
and subsequent award of a 7.8 million-dollar grant funded through Prop 63. 
Funding was awarded for a four-year term (beginning in 2011). Learn more 
about this award by visiting the UC Student Mental Health website: 
www.ucop.edu/student-mental-health-resources.
15
NATIONAL STUDENT MENTAL HEALTH TRENDS
While historically college students' most common mental health concerns 
stem from homesickness and transition issues, in recent years, more and 
more students of all ages and backgrounds are experiencing mental health 
challenges that are qualitatively different and significantly more complex.
According to the 2015 National College Health Assessment report published 
by the American College Health Association, over a 12-month period:
•	
47.7% of students felt things were hopeless
•	
34.5% of students felt so depressed it was difficult to function
•	
8.9% of students seriously considered suicide
	
The above percentages reflect overlapping reports; most, if not all, of the students described in 
the latter two statistics are encompassed by the students described in the first statistic.
According to a 2015 Center for Collegiate Mental Health (CCMH) report, 
published by Penn State University:
Data from 93 institutions showed, on average, an increase in the number of 
students seeking services at counseling centers (+29.6 percent) which was 
more than 5x the rate of institutional enrollment (+5.6 percent). Further, the 
increase in counseling center appointments (+38.4) was more than 7x the 
rate of institutional enrollment.
•	
21% of students presented with severe mental health disorders, while 
another 40% presented with mild mental health concerns
•	
Anxiety was the most predominant presenting concern among college 
students (56.9%), followed by stress (46.6%), depression (45.9%) and 
family problems (31.6%). Other common concerns were relationship 
16
problems (29.1%), academic performance (28%), adjustment to new 
environment (14%), grief and loss (12%), and suicidal ideation (9.6%)
•	
On average, 33.4% of students have already taken psychotropic 
medication by the time they enter the university
Furthermore, a report from the National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) 
in 2015 noted that approximately 64 percent of students no longer in 
college cited they were not attending due to mental health related reasons.
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA  
STUDENT MENTAL HEALTH TRENDS
The University of California has not been immune to these changing 
times. As documented in the 2006 Student Mental Health Committee 
Report to the Regents and a follow-up analysis in 2015:
•	
Following national trends, an increasing number of UC students are 
utilizing counseling services. There has been a documented 54 percent 
increase in utilization of counseling services over the past 8 years.
»»
This increase is significantly higher than the enrollment growth  
at UC over the same period (15.5%).
»»
This growth in demand may actually be an underestimate of 
needs because students may choose not to seek counseling at 
our centers because of limited staffing and increasingly lengthy 
non-crisis wait lists.
•	
An increasing number of UC Students are taking psychotropic 
medications.
»»
Roughly one in four students seeking counseling services within 
UC are already receiving psychotropic medication at the time 
they seek counseling.
17
»»
Data from our insurance claims by the students with UC Student 
Health Insurance Plans (UCSHIP) show that medications for 
mental health account for the greatest number of prescriptions.
»»
These students arrive on campus with different needs, different 
expectations for services and with different risk factors.
•	
Budget trends within the UC system limit the capacity of campuses to 
respond to mental health issues and are manifested in longer student 
wait-times, difficulty retaining staff, and decreased prevention services 
and programs.
•	
This increasing demand and declining capacity pose a threat to the 
learning environment because of their significant adverse impacts on 
faculty, staff, and students.
»»
Until the beginning of 2016, student fees devoted to relevant 
services had remained relatively flat while the demand for, and cost 
of, providing those services has increased. This applies to direct 
mental health services and to the indirect mental health services 
provided by allied programs in campus safety, disability services, 
student life, residential life, learning support and academic units.
»»
To help offset the growing need, several campuses have engaged 
in student initiated referendums specific to mental health
»»
In 2016, the Regents approved a 5% student fee increase and 
President Napalitano earmarked 50% of that fee for student 
mental health direct services. The addition of these fees will  
lead to the hiring of 85+ clinicians throughout the system.
In 2006, the Student Mental Health Committee urged the university to 
take action to ensure that its campuses were able to create healthier 
learning environments. Since that time, the Committee outlined a 3-Tier 
Model and has served as an advocate providing leadership to the UC 
system towards fulfilling this plan.
Tier 1: Direct Service 
and Crisis Intervention
Tier 2: Targeted 
Interventions for 
Vulnerable Groups 
Tier 3: Comprehensive 
Approach to Prevention
Student Mental Health 
Committee 3-Tier Model
This model was presented to the Regents in 2006 as a targeted 
strategy to address the mental health crisis. The model is 
actualized when the majority of resources are utilized in tier 3, 
followed by tier 2, thus minimizing the need for tier 1 services.
Progress and ongoing efforts towards actualizing the  
model are documented on the UC Student Mental  
Health Resources and Promising Practice website.
www.ucop.edu/student-mental-health-resources 
18
Tier 1: Restoration of Critical Mental Health  
and Crisis Response Services
Tier 1 represents the critical mental health services that need to  
be restored in order for UC campuses to fully respond to basic student 
mental health needs on our campuses. Resources targeted at this tier 
directly reduce wait times and support the provision of crisis services.
Tier 2: Targeted Interventions for Vulnerable Groups 
Tier 2 outlines targeted interventions for vulnerable groups through 
education, support and prevention programs, restores key services to help 
students manage stress and increases staffing levels in those campus life 
areas most impacted by student mental health issues, such as disability 
services, student judicial affairs and student life.
Tier 3: Comprehensive Approach to Prevention
Tier 3 requires enhancing the full spectrum of student life services towards 
a comprehensive approach to creating healthier learning environments 
through actively engaging faculty and academic staff, and facilitating proac-
tive communication and collaboration among mental health stakeholders.
Resources:
} Student Mental Health Committee 2006 Report to Regents 
www.ucop.edu/student-affairs/_files/student-mental-health-
cmte-report2006.pdf
} Student Mental Health Resources & Promising Practices website  
www.ucop.edu/student-mental-health-resources
19
20
Is This Guide For Me?
If you in any way teach, train, advise, supervise or mentor UC students, 
this guide is for you. We believe that you are in a unique position to notice 
and assist in the early stages of emotional distress of the students you 
have contact with. Throughout this guide we specifically make reference 
to faculty, staff and graduate teaching/research assistants. Please 
understand that these terms are not in reference to your official job title, 
but rather used in the broadest sense to represent the service you provide 
to the UC community.
I’M NOT A CLINICIAN, WHY DO I NEED TO LEARN ABOUT 
STUDENT MENTAL HEALTH? 
Student mental health issues affect all aspects of our academic communities.
Stress is a fact of life for students at the University of California. UC 
students are not just juggling rigorous academic demands; they are 
also coping with developmental challenges such as new friendships and 
relationships, new personal responsibilities, and distance from home and 
family. While many students thrive when faced with these challenges, 
some will feel overwhelmed, anxious, isolated or even hopeless. 
Additionally, many of our students will attempt to cope with grief and 
loss, trauma and abuse, major injuries, illnesses and psychological 
disorders while attending UC. The combination of all of these stressors 
can easily disrupt academic performance and may lead to dysfunctional  
coping and other serious consequences.
21
Did you know that most psychological problems — even the more serious 
concerns — have high rates of recovery if appropriate help is received in 
time? Unfortunately, many students fail to get the help they need for any 
number of reasons, including lack of knowledge about the early warning 
signs of psychological distress, denial, stigma and lack of information 
about campus resources that can provide help.
Knowing the warning signs of trouble, the early indicators of distress, how 
to respond in these situations and how to contribute to a healthy learning 
environment will greatly increase your ability to act appropriately in such 
situations, help improve another's quality of life, and may even help save a 
life. This book is intended to provide a little education to prepare you for 
this very important role.
02
Indicators of 
Distress
Indicators of Distress
4
Last semester, my younger sister decided to 
share her secret with me; she had cancer. She 
refused to let our parents living overseas know 
about it. I discussed my situation with my 
professor, confiding the stressful circumstance 
and my depressed mood. He told me that when 
he moved to California, he became depressed 
and started taking medicine. What helped 
him overcome his depression was exercise, 
especially running. I’m very thankful that he told 
me his story. Without it, I wouldn’t have realized 
that ‘anyone’ is subject to depression and that 
there is always help and support around you 
even though you may not be aware of it.”
—Anonymous Student
Indicators of Distress
25
INDICATORS OF DISTRESS
The Many Signs of Distress
As leaders in the UC community, you may be the first to notice a student 
who is experiencing difficulty. In these situations, you do not have to 
take on the role of a counselor or attempt to diagnose a student. You 
need only to notice the signs of distress and communicate these to the 
appropriate resource. In some instances you may also choose to have a 
direct conversation with the student to express your concern and offer 
resource referral information. We will discuss these options in more detail  
in chapter three. For now, let’s just focus on some key indicators.
Often, there are indicators that a student is experiencing distress long 
before a situation escalates to a crisis. To assist our students in maintaining 
their mental health and maximizing their intellectual growth, it is important 
to identify difficulties as early as possible. The presence of one of the 
following indicators alone does not necessarily mean that the student is 
experiencing severe distress. However, the more indicators you notice, the 
more likely it is that the student needs help. For the purposes of this text, 
the indicators have been grouped into the following categories:
Academic Indicators
Behavioral & Emotional 
Indicators
Physical Indicators
Other Factors
Safety Risk Indicators
26
ACADEMIC INDICATORS
Repeated absences from class, section, lab or employment
Missed assignments, exams or appointments
Deterioration in quality or quantity of work
Extreme disorganization or erratic performance
Written or artistic expression of unusual violence, morbidity, social isolation,  
despair or confusion; essays or papers that focus on suicide or death
Continual seeking of special provisions (extensions on papers  
or deadlines, make-up exams)
Patterns of perfectionism: e.g., can’t accept themselves if they  
don’t get an A+
Overblown or disproportionate response to grades or other evaluations
“Often, there are indicators 
that a student is experiencing 
distress long before a situation 
escalates to a crisis.”
27
BEHAVIORAL AND EMOTIONAL INDICATORS
Direct statements indicating:
•	
General distress
•	
Family conflict
•	
Grief & loss
•	
Economic hardships 
Angry or hostile outbursts, yelling, or aggressive comments
Unusual withdrawal or animated behavior
Expressions of hopelessness or worthlessness; crying or tearfulness
Expressions of severe anxiety or irritability
Excessively demanding or dependent behavior
Lack of response to outreach from course staff
Shakiness, tremors, fidgeting or pacing
“UC students are not just juggling 
rigorous academic demands … 
many of our students will attempt 
to cope with grief and loss, trauma 
and abuse, major injuries, illnesses, 
and psychological disorders…”
28
PHYSICAL INDICATORS
Deterioration in physical appearance or personal hygiene
Excessive fatigue, exhaustion; falling asleep in class repeatedly
Visible changes in weight; statements about change in appetite or sleep
Noticeable cuts, bruises or burns
Frequent or chronic illness
Disorganized speech, rapid or slurred speech, confusion
Unusual inability to make eye contact
Coming to class bleary-eyed or smelling of alcohol or other substances
OTHER FACTORS
Concern about a student by his/her peers, roommates, or teaching assistant
A hunch or gut-level reaction that something is wrong
“…the more indicators you notice, 
the more likely it is that the 
student needs help.”
29
SAFETY RISK INDICATORS
Written or verbal statements that mention despair, suicide or death
Severe hopelessness, depression, isolation and withdrawal
Statements to the effect that the student is “going away for a long time”
Physical or verbal aggression that is directed at self, others, animals or property
The student is unresponsive to the external environment; he or she is incoherent 
or passed out
The student is disconnected from reality/exhibiting psychosis
The student is displaying unmitigated disruptive behavior
The situation feels threatening or dangerous to you
ALERT:
If a student is exhibiting any of these signs, they may pose an 
immediate danger to her/himself. In these cases, you should 
do the following:
} If the student is in imminent danger or if you feel unsafe, 
immediately call the campus police or 911.
} Contact your campus Counseling Center for immediate 
consultation. Use the after-hours option for evening or 
weekend concerns.
30
5
03
Knowing When 
and How to 
Take Action
Knowing When and How to Take Action
I’ve been having trouble sleeping 
lately and I’ve been having 
flashbacks/nightmares in my 
dreams every night, and I always 
seem to be on the verge of tears. I 
don’t know what to do with myself 
anymore — I can’t sleep, can’t 
focus, can’t seem to be truly happy 
anymore. I want to seek help, 
but I don’t feel like I know where 
to turn. Are flashbacks, trouble 
sleeping, depression, being distant 
with my friends, etc., normal or 
could there be something seriously 
wrong with me?”
 —Anonymous Student
Knowing When and How to Take Action
33
Knowing When and  
How to Take Action
Now that you are aware of the indicators of distress, let’s discuss when 
and how you should respond.
In an emergency situation, it is clear that action is needed. You would call 
campus police (or 911) and/or or your Campus Counseling Center for 
immediate consultation.
However, when there is no immediate risk of harm, it may seem less 
clear when and how to act. You may notice one indicator and decide that 
something is clearly wrong. Or you may have a “gut-level feeling” that 
something is amiss. A simple check-in with the student may help you get  
a better sense of their situation.
It’s possible that any one indicator, by itself, may simply mean that a student 
is having an “off” day. However, any one serious sign (e.g., a student writes 
a paper expressing hopelessness and thoughts of suicide) or a cluster of 
smaller signs (e.g., emotional outbursts, repeated absences and noticeable 
cuts on the arm) indicates a need to take action on behalf of the student.
Use your professional experience, good judgment and instincts. If you are 
genuinely concerned about a student, take action! There is no harm in 
offering resources to a student who is not in need; but there can be serious 
consequences for failing to follow through with your observations.
KNOWING WHEN AND HOW TO ACT
34
Choosing a Pathway
STEP 1: CONSULT
Once you have identified a student in distress the first step is to 
CONSULT. From there you will decide between one of two pathways: 
STEP 2: REFER AND/OR REPORT
REFER: Speak directly with the student to offer support and referrals.
REPORT: Contact your Counseling Center to report the concern.  
(You may be advised to notify the student’s academic advisor, 
residence director or other resource).
Your decision about which path to choose may be influenced by your level 
of experience, the nature or severity of the problem, your ability to give 
time to the situation and a variety of other personal factors. Either option 
can be an acceptable approach.
“If you have a relationship or 
rapport with the student, speaking 
directly to the student may be the 
best option ... however, if you do 
not really know the student, you 
may prefer to report the concern.”
35
STEP 1: CONSULT
CONSULT WITH ONE OR MORE OF THESE RESOURCES
Immediate Supervisor
Department Chair or Dean
Faculty Advisor (for graduate teaching/research assistants)
Co-worker
Academic Advising or Student Services 
The Undergraduate/Graduate School or College (for the student’s field)
Student of Concern/ Behavioral Intervention/ Risk Assessment/ CARE Team
Counseling Center
It is possible that you might learn through consultation that a student’s 
concerns are already being addressed by another entity. However, if more 
follow-through is needed, use your consultation to help you determine 
what to do next.
Move on to STEP 2.
36
STEP 2: REFER AND/OR REPORT
REFER: Speak directly with the student to offer support and referrals.
If you choose to speak directly with the student, be reminded that you will 
NOT be taking on the role of counselor. You need only listen, care and offer 
resource referral information. Follow these recommendations:
Meet privately with the student (choose a time and place where you will not be 
interrupted).
Set a positive tone. Express your concern and caring. 
Point out specific signs you’ve observed. “I’ve noticed lately that you … ”
Ask, “How are things going for you?” Listen attentively to the student’s response 
and encourage him or her to talk. “Tell me more about that.”
Allow the student time to tell the story. Allow silences in the conversation.  
Don’t give up if the student is slow to talk.
Ask open-ended questions that deal directly with the issues without judging. 
“What problems has that situation caused you?”
If there are signs of safety risk, ask if the student is considering suicide. A student 
who is considering suicide will likely be relieved that you asked. If the student is 
not contemplating suicide, asking the question will not “put ideas in their head.”
Restate what you have heard as well as your concern and caring. Ask the student 
what they think would help. “What do you need to do to get back on a healthy path?”
37
Suggest resources and referrals. Share any information you have about the 
particular resource you are suggesting and the potential benefit to the student.  
“I know the folks in that office and they are really good at helping students work 
through these kinds of situations.”
•	
Provide name, phone number and office location of the referral resource or,  
if comfortable, offer to walk with the student to the location.
Avoid making sweeping promises of confidentiality, particularly if the student 
presents a safety risk. Students who are suicidal need swift professional 
intervention; assurances of absolute confidentiality may get in the way.
Unless the student is suicidal or may be a danger to others (see more on suicide, 
page 74), the ultimate decision to access resources is the student’s. If the student 
says, “I’ll think about it,” when you offer referral information, it is okay. People in 
varying levels of distress sometimes deny their problems because it is difficult to 
admit they need help or they think things will get better on their own.
Let the student know that you are interested in hearing how they are doing in a 
day or two. End the conversation in a way that will allow you, or the student, to 
come back to the subject at another time. Keep the lines of communication open.
Talk with someone in your college — academic advising office, dean, etc., about 
the conversation and document your actions.
38
REPORT: Contact your Counseling Center to report the concern.
If you do not really know the student, you may prefer to report the concern. 
Contacting the Counseling Center for consultation is never a bad idea. One 
of the counselors can help you determine who else may need to be notified 
of the situation and/or coach you through making a referral to a student 
with whom you have never interacted. When selecting this option, please 
be aware of the following:
Information shared with a counselor is confidential. The counselor will accept all 
information you provide but may not be able to share the results of follow-up. While 
this can feel unsettling at times, it is necessary to protect the students’ privacy.
It is very common that the counselor will need to phone you back to provide 
recommendations. The counselor may need to consult with internal staff, discuss 
with management, research campus policies, etc. If the student is an active client 
at the Counseling Center, the counselor may need to confer with the student’s 
treating therapist. Rest assured that reporting the concern will activate a 
collaborative approach to finding the right resources.
Often, the best approach is not for the counselor themselves to reach out to the 
student. Your consultation may result in a request that you take further action 
such as speaking to the student directly, giving the student a referral to a campus 
resource, or involving another department on campus. Be willing to follow through 
with the counselor’s recommendations.
In the event that a counselor determines a mental health professional will make a 
cold contact with the student, consider giving permission to use your name as the 
referral source. It is challenging for a counselor to cold call a student and explain 
the reason for the call without providing context. 
At the conclusion of the consultation, make sure to document your 
actions and any follow-up.
39
HELP FOR YOURSELF, COLLEAGUE OR FAMILY MEMBER
Dealing with a student in distress may be physically, mentally and/or 
emotionally draining. Each campus, medical center and national laboratory 
within the University of California administers its own Faculty and Staff 
Assistance Program, sometimes called Employee Assistance Program (EAP). 
EAP is available to “debrief” with campus community members to restore a 
sense of equilibrium.
EAP counselors provide assessment, referral and brief counseling services 
that are free and confidential. 
Go online for more information on programs available  
on your UC campus:
} http://ucnet.universityofcalifornia.edu/contacts/faculty-staff-
assistance-programs.html
40
A Collaborative System  
of Support
Student of Concern / Behavioral Intervention / Risk Assesment /  
CARE Teams
Did you know that each UC campus has a collaborative support system 
to address students of concern? While the exact names of teams vary 
by campus, each campus has a team comprised of representatives from 
various departments that work together to address students of concern. 
The goals of these teams are to works collectively to foster a safe, healthy 
and responsive campus climate.
While there are some variations based on campus needs and resources,  
at any given time, these teams may consist of the following members:*
•	
Assistant Vice Chancellor
•	
Counseling Center Director
•	
Dean of Students
•	
Student Conduct Officer
•	
Campus Psychiatrist
•	
Medical Director
•	
Campus Police Chief
•	
Campus Legal Counsel
•	
Campus Social Worker
•	
Residence Director
*	 Ad hoc members are added as warranted on a case-by-case basis.
41
This team is called together regularly to discuss students of concern. 
This collaborative approach helps coordinate the best possible care 
for any particular student. While students must be treated fairly and 
responsibly, the campus is not powerless or reluctant to act decisively 
when threats arise.
Refer to your Campus Resource insert to learn your individual campus 
protocol for initiating discussion about a student of concern.
42
Privacy Laws
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS: THE FAMILY 
EDUCATIONAL RIGHTS AND PRIVACY ACT (FERPA)
Naturally, you may have some concerns about disclosing student 
information. Please review the following frequently asked questions 
regarding privacy laws. Appropriate consideration for student privacy 
should be given before information is shared with people other than 
those suggested in this document.
WHAT DOES FERPA COVER? 
FERPA limits the disclosure of information from student “education 
records.” Education records include virtually all records maintained by an 
educational institution, in any format, that identify a student on its face 
or from which a student’s identity could be deduced from descriptive or 
other information contained in the record, either alone or in combination 
with other publicly available information.
43
MAY I DISCLOSE PERSONAL KNOWLEDGE AND 
IMPRESSIONS ABOUT A STUDENT, BASED ON MY 
PERSONAL INTERACTIONS WITH THE STUDENT?
Yes. FERPA applies only to information derived from student education 
records, and not to personal knowledge derived from direct, personal 
experience with a student. For example, a faculty or staff member who 
personally observes a student engaging in erratic and threatening 
behavior is not prohibited by FERPA from disclosing that observation, 
although any such disclosures should be for the purpose of seeking 
assistance for the student.
MAY I DISCLOSE INFORMATION ABOUT A STUDENT TO 
OTHER UNIVERSITY EMPLOYEES?
Yes. FERPA permits disclosure of information about a student to 
other “school officials” who have “legitimate educational interests” in 
the information. A “legitimate educational interest” is not limited to 
employees directly involved in academic or educational functions, but 
rather includes any university employee for whom the information 
is relevant and necessary to perform their university duties. This can 
include the Dean of Students, campus legal counsel, the student conduct 
office, the campus police department, the campus student health or 
counseling center, etc.
44
CAN INFORMATION FROM A STUDENT’S EDUCATION 
RECORDS BE DISCLOSED TO PROTECT HEALTH OR SAFETY? 
Yes. FERPA permits the disclosure of information from student education 
records to appropriate parties either inside or outside of the University of 
California in connection with an emergency if knowledge of the information 
is necessary to protect the health or safety of the student or other 
individuals. For example, if a student sends an email to his resident advisor 
saying that he has just been diagnosed with a highly contagious disease 
such as measles, the university could alert the student’s roommates, and 
perhaps others with whom the student has come in close contact, to 
urge them to seek appropriate testing and medical care. Safety concerns 
warranting disclosure could include a student’s suicidal statements or 
ideations, unusually erratic and angry behaviors, or similar conduct that 
others would reasonably see as posing a risk of serious harm to the  
student or others.
“FERPA permits the disclosure of 
information from student education 
records … in connection with an emergency 
if knowledge of the information is 
necessary to protect the health or safety  
of the student or other individuals.”
45
WHAT CAN I SAY IF A PARENT CALLS ME? 
FERPA does not give parents a blanket right to access information about 
students, even where the student is financially dependent on the parent. 
However, as discussed above, FERPA and other student privacy regulations 
generally allow the university to release information to parents, police 
or others whose knowledge of the information is necessary to protect 
the health and safety of the student or other individuals. In addition, as 
discussed above, FERPA does not prohibit disclosure of personal knowledge 
or impressions about the student that are not contained in student records.
If you are unsure if disclosure is necessary to protect the health and 
safety of the student, seek consultation from your direct supervisor, the 
Counseling Center, or your campus counsel. You can always listen to a 
parent’s concerns and let them know you will get back to them after you 
get clarity on what information you can release. FERPA does not prohibit 
you from gathering information from outside sources.
For more information about FERPA:
} http://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/fpco/ferpa/index.html
7
04
Cultural 
Diversity
Cultural Diversity
I am an international student; that 
means I grew up in a different culture. 
One thing [here in U.S.] that confuses 
me is ‘handshakes.’ My culture demands 
that the younger of the two should wait 
until the older one offers his/her hand. 
But recently, I noticed that such is not 
always the case in the U.S. Whenever I 
am meeting with a professor, I am left  
in an awkward situation! I wait for the 
profs to offer me their hand and for  
some reason, it seems like they are 
waiting for me to offer my hand and 
introduce myself!!!”
—Anonymous Student
Cultural Diversity
49
Our Diverse University
The University of California is comprised of a highly diverse student population. 
As a faculty or staff member, you will undoubtedly have frequent interactions 
with students that are different from you. These differences may be in the 
form of race, ethnicity, cultural background, physical abilities, gender, sexual 
orientation, religion/spirituality, social class, etc. These are all important 
components to be mindful of when dealing with students in distress.
Traditionally, counseling has been viewed with some hesitation and mistrust 
by certain ethnic or cultural groups. Therefore, for some students, there may 
be hesitation and/or reluctance to seek out counseling or any form of mental 
health treatment on their own. Although the stigma regarding mental health 
appears to be decreasing as more and more students of varied backgrounds 
are presenting to Counseling Centers, it still exists. As faculty and staff, you 
are in an influential position of being able to suggest counseling as an option 
for students who may not otherwise seek this out on their own.
This chapter will help you:
Become aware of the potential barriers to  
students seeking help
Consider varying communication styles in your  
interactions with students
Understand the intersection of multiple identities
Explore considerations for working with:
•	
Students with disabilities	
•	
Military veteran students
•	
LGBTQ-identified students
CULTURAL DIVERSITY
50
Barriers to Help-Seeking
You are being asked to approach students from different backgrounds 
with sensitivity, an open mind and flexibility. It is vital to have an 
understanding of some of the potential reservations and concerns 
students may have about counseling. Consider the following:
•	
Some students may consider attending counseling as a personal 
weakness, and an indication that they cannot solve their own 
problems. Other hesitations about attending counseling may have 
to do with a student’s family members not supporting treatment, 
as they may not believe in depression, anxiety, etc., and feel that 
the student should be able to overcome challenges on their own. 
In addition, some students may come from certain backgrounds in 
which it is considered a betrayal to the family to share information 
about family problems and struggles with a stranger.
•	
The ways in which distress is expressed can vary between cultures. 
For example, members of some cultural groups more easily disclose 
physical symptoms as a way to explain emotional distress. Other 
cultures will acknowledge being under a lot of stress but will not 
identify with having anxiety, feeling depressed or any other clinical 
mental health term.
The best thing you can do is ask the student what they think of counseling. 
Never assume what barriers a student is facing. Question if they know 
anyone who attends counseling and if they think it could help them. Use 
your own knowledge and experience to make a recommendation.
51
Various Communication 
Styles 
When interacting with a student, be aware of how your communication 
style might be viewed by someone from another culture. This is important, 
as communication styles can differ between groups. These differences may 
center on personal space, volume, tone, eye contact, direct vs. indirect 
communication, assertiveness, expectations of authority figures, etc. Avoid 
getting frustrated and instead try to understand your differences.
Even if you believe you are familiar with a student’s cultural background, it 
is important to listen for their cultural perspective, and inquire about this if 
necessary. There is great variation within cultures so do not assume two 
students from the same background will think or act alike. It is important 
not to make assumptions and rely on stereotypes based on a student’s 
membership in a certain group.
It’s OK not to know everything! As members of a highly diverse university 
community, we are all continually learning from each other about 
experiences that are different from our own, and this serves to expand  
and enrich our lives.
52
Intersectionality
Intersectionality is the study of the relationships among multiple identities 
which exist within the same person. More specifically, the theory of 
intersectionality suggests that — and seeks to examine how — various 
biological, social and cultural categories such as gender, race, class, ability, 
sexual orientation and other dimensions of identity interact on multiple  
and often simultaneous levels, contributing to systematic injustice and 
social inequality (Crenshaw, 1989: Collins, 2000).
Consider your own identities. Are you solely your race, gender, sexual 
identity or religious affiliation? Or are these and various other identities 
constantly at play with each other forming the basis for your interactions 
with and understanding of the world?
Students with mental health challenges will not experience those 
challenges in a vacuum or in a one-dimensional way (example: Filipino 
student with depression). More often than not, they will experience mental 
health challenges along with the intersection of their multiple identities 
which may include multiple forms of discrimination and oppression all 
working together (example: Filipino, gay, male, able-bodied, Catholic 
student with depression).
53
Again, it’s OK not to know everything! The rich and diverse identities of 
our students are what make it such a privilege to get to know them on a 
personal level. Try to avoid making assumptions based on one particular 
identity and listen carefully to how the student describes their concerns.
Resources:
} University of California Center for New Racial Studies –  
A Multi-Campus Research Program 
http://www.uccnrs.ucsb.edu/intersectionality
} The Steve Fund  
http://www.stevefund.org/
54
Students with Disabilities 
Facts about disability:
Students with documentation of a disability are eligible to access 
accommodations through your campus Disability Resource/Services Center 
(department title varies by campus). Common disabilities at the college 
level include physical, learning, psychiatric, autism spectrum, AD/HD and 
chronic health disabilities. Disabling conditions may occur at any point in 
time due to accidents, illness, stressful life events, trauma or injury.
Students with physical disabilities may present special classroom  
and lab access needs associated with limitations in mobility, speaking, 
hearing and/or vision.
Students with chronic health disorders may experience difficulties 
participating in their academic programs due to the condition itself or 
the ongoing treatment protocol. Flexibility of non-essential attendance 
requirements may be appropriate, depending on the courses curriculum.
Students with learning disabilities have neurological impairments that 
interfere with information processing, memory and retrieval, and output. 
These disabilities can have an impact on reading, writing, math, attention, 
concentration and/or overall organization. Students may need to use 
technology or other strategies to compensate.
Students with psychiatric disabilities may have a chronic and debilitating 
psychological condition that may at times affect their ability to participate 
fully in a routine educational program. Many side effects of medication 
may cause delays in processing. Examples of conditions that fall under 
55
this classification include Bipolar Disorder, Major Depression, Anxiety 
Disorders, and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).
Students with Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (AD/HD) may 
experience inattentive, hyperactive and/or impulsive behaviors due to 
a dysfunction of the central nervous system. These behaviors may make 
longer class periods and time management difficult at times.
Students with Autism Spectrum disorders may have difficulty negotiating 
social situations, group work or making eye contact, or may exhibit 
impulsive behaviors. Typically, students with Autism Spectrum disorders, 
including Asperger’s, are concrete thinkers and may have difficulty with 
vague assignments and taking another perspective.
Students with physical, psychiatric or other disabilities may require the 
use of a service animal (dog).
Students with disabilities may not realize that they have a particular 
challenge and that treatment/accommodations are available. If you 
have concerns about a student, please contact your Disability Resource 
Center for advice and support. Refer to your Campus Resource insert for 
contact information.
56
Things to know
The Disability Resource Center is authorized to determine appropriate 
accommodations for students with disabilities, which are reflected in a Letter 
of Accommodation (LOA). Faculty members are responsible for providing the 
accommodations indicated in the LOA.
Be open to follow-up consultation with the Disability Resource Center regarding 
accommodations for the student.
Recognize that all students must be held to the same Student Code of Conduct 
and use the Disability Resource Center as a resource if you have questions or 
concerns about a student’s behavior.
Remember students requesting accommodations must present an 
accommodations letter from the Disability Resource Center with approved 
accommodations listed. Students affiliated with the Disability Resource Center 
will have valid documentation on file. Professors may not ask to see the 
documentation, but may request to see the accommodations letter.
Remember that all students, regardless of disability, were admitted to UC 
under the same admissions requirements as their peers, and therefore need 
to be held to the same academic standards. Professors are not required to 
make accommodations that would fundamentally alter their classes. However, 
accommodations are a part of providing equal access.
Take steps to develop course curriculum that meets universal design and  
access standards. This includes utilizing multiple teaching styles. Visit your 
campuses Center for Teaching Excellence website for more information (refer to  
your Campus Resource Insert).
Direct concerns about the use or presence of a service animal to your Disability 
Resource Center (refer to your Campus Resource Insert).
57
What to avoid
Assuming that these students will be distressed or distressing
Asking questions about the disability or how the student became disabled
Prejudging a student’s potential based on a disability
Making reference to the student’s disability in class or in front of others
Using patronizing language with the student
Underestimating or questioning the validity of the stated disability
Assuming that the limitations/accommodations for one student with a particular 
disability will be the same as another student with the same or similar disability
Assuming the student understands the academic limitations potentially imposed 
by the disability
Assuming the student qualifies for accommodations without the Disability 
Resource Center verification
Resources:
} Your Campus Disability Services Resource  
(refer to your Campus Resource Insert)
} Disability Rights California – Higher Education Publications  
http://www.disabilityrightsca.org/pubs/
PublicationsHigherEducation.htm 
} The Jed Foundation, Student Mental Health and the Law: A 
Resource for Institutions of Higher Education  
http://www.jedfoundation.org/assets/Programs/Program_
downloads/StudentMentalHealth_Law_2008.pdf
58
Student Veterans/Active 
ROTC/Reserves 
Each year, students enroll or are readmitted to UC after serving in the 
armed forces. Some of these students have completed their military 
obligations, and others are still involved with the military in some way, 
whether they continue on active duty or are involved with the Reserves  
or National Guard. Some students are very forthcoming about their 
veteran status and experiences, while others choose not to reveal their 
veteran status to faculty, staff or other students because they believe  
they may be treated differently or stigmatized by political issues  
associated with their military service.
Things to know
Students with veteran status often have complex issues related to their academic 
and financial relationships with the niversity due to federal policies.
The university works with veteran students to make their transitions as seamless as 
possible, but federal policies often make this quite difficult.
Students who are still involved with the military may be redeployed at any time (in 
as little as 72 hours), so they may have difficulty fulfilling their course requirements. 
The university’s policy is to do whatever is in the student’s best interest so as to allow 
them to complete their courses.
59
Like any student, veteran students may encounter obstacles to their academic 
success. These may include:
•	
The distraction of potential redeployment
•	
Money and family demands
•	
Emotional and psychological traumas that result from combat experiences
•	
Physical injury, some visible and some invisible, such as a traumatic brain injury
•	
Interactions with students, faculty and staff who are perceived as being 
insensitive to the experiences student veterans have had
•	
Navigating both academic and military cultures
Veteran students may be in need of emotional or other health-related 
support, but some may not be comfortable seeking this support on 
campus. It is also not unusual for student veterans to be reluctant to seek 
any help due to the perception that they need to be strongly self-reliant.
Resources:
} Your campus Veterans Resource  
(refer to your Campus Resource insert for contact information)
} University of California Veteran Resource Website 
http://veterans.universityofcalifornia.edu
} VA Campus Toolkit 
www.mentalhealth.va.gov/StudentVeteran/#sthash.6O0TyrkM.dpbs 
} The Jed Foundation – Helping Our Student Veterans succeed  
www.jedfoundation.org/professionals/programs-and-research/
helping-our-student-veterans-succeed
60
LGBTQ-Identified Students 
According to the American College Health Association (ACHA) 
nationwide survey of over 90,000 students, the number of college 
students who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer or 
questioning (LGBTQ) has steadily increased since early 2000.
PERCENTAGE OF COLLEGE STUDENTS WHO IDENTIFY AS LGBTQ
2000-2015
2000
2012
2015
Gay/Lesbian
1.4%
2.6%
3.0%
Bisexual
1.5%
3.8%
5.5%
Unsure
1.5%
2.0%
3.0%
Transgender
0.1%
0.2%
0.5%
Identifying as a sexual or gender minority may carry associated stressors. 
In another recent survey of 10,000 youth, LGBTQ youth were nearly twice 
as likely as non-LGBTQ youth to report having been excluded by peers at 
school, twice as likely to have been verbally harassed at school, three times 
as likely to feel that they do not fit in, and one-third less likely to report 
having an adult they can turn to for help (Human Rights Campaign, 2012). 
Such stigmatization can lead to psychological distress and school failure.
61
Risk Factors
The two factors known to be most detrimental to LGBTQ student mental 
health are hostile school climate and family rejection. Both are associated 
with increases in rates of homelessness, substance abuse, suicide and 
unsafe sexual behavior among LGBTQ youth (Toomey et al, 2010).
Being bullied at school doubles the risk of suicide and is associated with increased 
depression, decreased self-esteem, increased substance use and increased school 
dropout (Fedewa & Ahn, 2011; Russell et al, 2010; Toomey et al, 2011).
Being rejected at home increases the risk of depression more than six times and 
increases the risk of suicide more than eight times (Ryan et al, 2009).
Protective Factors
Other factors at school and home are known to be protective against 
adverse outcomes in mental health and academic success. Protective 
factors at school include:
At least one supportive adult
LGBTQ-inclusive policies and social groups
Anti-bullying education
Safe Zone programs to educate peers, faculty and staff
62
Resources:
Contact your campuses' LGBTQ Resource Center for campus-
specific resources and training. (refer to your Campus Resource 
Insert for contact information).
} The Safe Zone Project  
http://thesafezoneproject.com/
} American College Health Association. (2012).  
American College Health Association – National College Health 
Assessment II: Reference Group Executive Summary Fall 2012. 
Hanover, MD: American College Health Association.
} Fedewa, A.L. & Ahn, S. (2011).  
The effects of bullying and peer victimization on sexual minority 
and heterosexual youth: A quantitative meta-analysis of the 
literature. Journal of GLBT Family Studies, 7(4), 398-418.
} Human Rights Campaign. (2012).  
Growing up LGBT in America: HRC Youth Survey Report Key Findings. 
http://www.hrc.org/files/assets/resources/Growing-Up-LGBT-in-
America_Report.pdf on 4/15/13.
} Toomey, R.B., Ryan, C., Diaz, R., Card, N.A., & Russell, S.T. (2010).  
Gender nonconforming lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender 
youth: School victimization and young adult psychosocial 
adjustment. Developmental Psychology, 46, 1580–1589.
63
05
Responding 
to Distressed 
& Distressing 
Students
Responding to Distressed & Distressing Students
I’m a sophomore here at UC … and I’ve 
been dealing with eating disorders for about 
six years now — two years with anorexia, 
four years with bulimia. Freshman year 
was full of new experiences and I was 
determined not to let my eating disorder 
get in the way of my social life/academics, 
but this year has been challenging. My  
GPA fell to a 2.8, and for two quarters now,  
I have barely left my room. Since most of 
my classes are large lectures, I can get away 
with not going to class and just reading the 
text at home, but I haven’t been to class  
for six days now. I know that I need help 
really badly, but at the same time, if I’ve 
managed to survive for years this way,  
then I’m sure I can keep doing it. I wish  
one of my professors would notice and  
send me for help.”
—Anonymous Student
Responding to Distressed & Distressing Students
67
Synopsis of Student Concerns 
and How to Respond
This section goes into more detail about common issues that arise when 
dealing with distressed and distressing students (both graduate and 
undergraduate). As you review each section, you will become aware 
of common signs and symptoms associated with the various types 
of distress, you will learn how to respond and you will be directed to 
available resources. In the pages that follow, we will cover the following 
clusters of concerns: 
Emotional Distress
•	
Anxiety
•	
Depression
•	
Suicide
•	
Grief & Loss
•	
Disordered Eating
•	
Poor Contact with Reality 
Distress caused by Trauma/Abuse
•	
Sexual Assault
•	
Stalking/Harassment
•	
Hate Crimes & Incidents
•	
Hazing
•	
Abusive Relationships
RESPONDING TO DISTRESSED & DISTRESSING STUDENTS
68
General Health & Wellness Distress
•	
Academic Failure/Dismissal
•	
Adjustment/Transitions
•	
Substance Abuse
•	
Self-Injury
 
Distressing & Disruptive Students
•	
Excessively Demanding/Dependent
•	
Aggressive/Potentially Violent 
This is not meant to be an exhaustive list. If you are concerned about 
a situation not depicted in the above list, please do not hesitate to call 
your campus Counseling Center for consultation (refer to your Campus 
Resource Insert for contact information). 
69
Emotionally Distressed 
Students
Students experiencing emotional distress may struggle with any of the 
following concerns. In this section, we will review the signs and symptoms 
for each type of concern and list educational resources for anyone 
interested in learning more. At the end of this section, you will find general 
tips for responding to students in emotional distress including suggestions 
for how to intervene.
Anxiety
Depression
Suicide
Grief & Loss
Disordered Eating
Poor Contact with Reality
70
ANXIETY
Stress, worry and anxiety are normal, expected and inevitable parts of 
college life. A 2013 Associated Press MTVu poll that surveyed students 
at 40 U.S. colleges revealed that 85 percent of students reported feeling 
stressed in their daily lives. The areas that engendered the most stress 
included grades, school work, money and relationships.
When worry and stress become overwhelming or unmanageable, this may 
be indicative of an anxiety disorder. Anxiety disorders are distinguished 
from normal, everyday stress when the anxiety is more intense, lasts longer 
(anxiety that may persist for months instead of going away after a stressful 
situation has passed) and lead to avoidance behaviors that interfere with 
one’s life.
Anxiety can be generalized across many different situations, or situation-
specific, such as test anxiety, social anxiety, specific phobia or public 
speaking anxiety. For some students, the cause of the anxiety is clear, 
and for others, it is less apparent. It can be exhibited in different ways 
and in varying levels of intensity. Anxiety not only affects the way one 
thinks and feels, but can also manifest through physical symptoms.
71
Signs and symptoms
Students with high levels of anxiety may talk about being under a lot of pressure, 
feeling tense, stressed, burned out or overwhelmed.
Anxiety can arise in the form of a panic attack in which symptoms include intense 
fear accompanied by subsequent physical symptoms such as a pounding heartbeat, 
sweating, shaking, shortness of breath, chest pain, dizziness and fear of dying or 
losing control.
Additional symptoms of anxiety may include feeling on edge, difficulty 
concentrating, trouble falling or staying asleep, headaches, restlessness, muscle 
tension or soreness, trembling, twitching and fatigue.
Learn more:
} Anxiety and Depression Association of America  
http://www.adaa.org/ 
} Online Self-Assessment  
http://www.mentalhealthscreening.org/screening/collegex
} National Institute of Mental Health  
http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/anxiety-disorders/index.shtml
} American Psychological Association  
https://www.apa.org/helpcenter/anxiety-treatment.aspx
72
DEPRESSION
Clinical depression is one of the most common mental health issues seen 
on college campuses. While almost everyone has had periods in their lives 
when they have felt sad or down, these feelings tend to become less intense 
with the passage of time. However, clinical depression occurs when feelings 
of extreme sadness or despair last for at least two weeks or longer and 
interfere with the ability to function in different areas, such as school, work 
and/or relationships.
Depression can affect one’s ability to do simple day-to-day activities. A 
depressed person often has difficulty making decisions or doing things they 
may usually do with ease. For example, the day-to day-tasks of paying bills, 
attending classes, reading assignments and returning phone calls may seem 
overwhelming. At these times, professional help may be needed. Depression 
has been shown to be highly treatable with appropriate intervention.
Signs and symptoms
Feelings of emptiness, hopelessness, helplessness and worthlessness
A deep sense of sadness
Lack of energy, fatigue
Social withdrawal
Loss of interest in activities you used to enjoy
An inability to experience pleasure
Loss of appetite or eating too much
73
Problems falling sleep, staying asleep or sleeping too much
Difficulties with concentration, memory and decision-making
Aches, pains, headaches, cramps or digestive problems that do not go away
Thoughts of suicide or suicide attempts
Sometimes depression includes irritation, anxiety and anger
In its most serious form, depression can be accompanied by self-destructive 
thoughts and intentions as a way to escape from the emotional pain. If you  
are concerned about immediate threats to safety, call 911 or contact the 
campus police.
Learn more:
} Online Self-Assessment  
http://helpyourselfhelpothers.org/
} National Institute of Mental Health  
http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml
} Anxiety and Depression Association of America  
http://www.adaa.org/understanding-anxiety/depression
} ULifeline  
http://www.ulifeline.org/topics/128-depression
} NAMI  
http://www.nami.org/template.cfm?section=Depression
74
SUICIDE
Suicide is the second leading cause of death among college students, 
killing more young people between the ages of 18 and 24 than all physical 
illnesses combined. Suicide is often viewed as a way out of a problem or 
crisis that is causing intense emotional pain and suffering. It is associated 
with feelings of helplessness, hopelessness and a need for escape. The 
person who is suicidal often sees very limited options for themselves, and 
views suicide as a problem-solving strategy to end the emotional struggle.
People who contemplate suicide are often ambivalent about ending their 
lives and are often willing to get help through counseling when a caring 
person facilitates the process for them. Cryptic or indirect messages left by 
students should not be ignored. Some students who are severely depressed 
do not have the emotional energy to seek help and use cryptic messages to 
reach out, i.e., “I won’t be bothering you much longer,” “It’ll all be over soon” or 
“Time is running out.”
It is important to note that suicidal crises are time-limited, making timely 
interventions highly effective. The heightened emotional state during 
a crisis, although signified by emotional turmoil, also can lead to the 
information, insight and motivation necessary to resolve the conflict. As 
faculty and staff, it is essential that you view all suicidal comments seriously 
and take appropriate action, which may often involve contacting the 
Counseling Center or even campus police, if necessary.
Students who are feeling suicidal are often relieved when someone finally 
asks them, “Are you thinking of killing yourself?” They no longer have to 
struggle with their feelings alone. Asking them if they are suicidal will 
not “put the thought into their head.”
75
Students who are suicidal can be helped by counseling and sometimes 
medication. Some may be hospitalized for a short time to enable 
medications to take effect, to ensure their safety in the short run, and  
to help them connect with resources to deal with the issues they face.
Warning signs
Statements (verbal or written) implying the person does not intend to be around 
in the future
Statements expressing hopelessness and a wish to die
Viewing death as a means of escape from distress
Preoccupation with death and dying
Giving away valued personal possessions
Prolonged depressed mood
Increased drug and alcohol use
Deterioration in hygiene 
Loss of interest in pleasurable activities
Sudden drop in grades or failure to turn in assignments/keep appointments
Sudden improvement in mood after prolonged period of depression
Social isolation 
Specific suicide intent, plan or access to lethal means to carry out plan
Significant impulsivity
Pessimistic view of the future
76
How to ask about suicide
Take the student’s comments as a serious cry for help. It is important that all 
statements about suicide are taken seriously, and not minimized.
Project a calm demeanor, although this is not how you may be feeling on the 
inside. The modeling of calm behavior is very important for the student, as  
they are looking to you for assistance.
Be very straightforward and know that your question is not going to cause them to 
act on their suicidal thoughts. In fact, suicidal students usually want to communicate 
their feelings. Possible ways to phrase the question include,
•	
“I can see that this is a difficult time for you and you are feeling very 
distressed right now. Are you having thoughts of hurting yourself?”
•	
“I am concerned for you. Have you been thinking of ending your life?”
•	
“Are you considering suicide?”
Refer student to the Counseling Center. It may be beneficial to walk the student 
over to the center. With a suicidal student, it is important to make sure that they 
actually get help, and not to assume they will follow through on their own. If it is 
after business hours and the student is in imminent danger, call 911 or contact the 
campus police for assistance.
What if the student refuses help?
If the student refuses help and you are still concerned, call the Counseling Center 
for consultation and refer the student to the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline 
(write the number down for them). This is a 24-hour number any student or faculty/
staff person can call to speak with someone about suicide (800) 273-TALK (8255).
Know your limitations and consult with your colleges — do not take on the 
responsibility of a suicidal student by yourself. It can be very emotionally 
draining and stressful to encounter a student who is suicidal.
77
If you are concerned about immediate threats to safety, call 911 or the 
campus police.
Remember! Employee Assistance Program (EAP) counselors are available 
to debrief with staff and faculty after an emotionally charged interaction. 
EAP counselors provide assessment, referral, and brief counseling services 
that are free and confidential.
Go online for more information on programs available on your UC campus:
http://ucnet.universityofcalifornia.edu/contacts/faculty-staff-assistance-
programs.html
Learn more:
} National Suicide Prevention Lifeline 24-hour crisis line,  
1-800-273-TALK (8255), http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/
} Suicide Prevention Resource Center, www.sprc.org
•	
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Suicide in College 
and University Settings, http://www.sprc.org/sites/sprc.org/
files/library/college_sp_whitepaper.pdf
} The Jed Foundation, https://www.jedfoundation.org/professionals/
programs-and-research
} Active Minds, www.activeminds.org
} Means Matter, www.hsph.harvard.edu/means-matter/index.html
} Higher Education Mental Health Alliance, www.hemha.org
78
GRIEF & LOSS
Grief is a normal response to the sorrow, emotion and confusion that 
come from losing someone or something important to you. It is a natural 
part of life. Grief is a typical reaction to death, divorce, job loss, a move 
away from family and friends, or loss of good health due to illness. Grief is 
difficult at any time in one’s life, but it can be devastating during college.
Between 35 and 48 percent of college students have lost a family 
member or close friend within the last two years (Balk, 1997; Wrenn, 
1999; Balk, Walker & Baker, 2010). Furthermore, 8.6 percent of college 
students’ academic performances have been affected by the death of 
a family member or close friend within the last year (Servaty-Seib & 
Hamilton, 2006). Research shows that a student’s GPA significantly 
decreases during the semester of loss, providing empirical support for 
the assertion that bereaved students are at risk for declined academic 
performance (Servaty-Seib, 2006).
Signs and symptoms
Just after a death or loss, students may feel empty and numb, as if they are 
in shock. They may experience physical changes such as trembling, nausea, 
trouble breathing, muscle weakness, dry mouth, or trouble sleeping and 
eating. Some students become angry — at a situation, a particular person 
or just angry in general. Often times, Grief is accompanied by guilt. Guilt 
is often expressed as “I could have, I should have and I wish I would have” 
statements. Students in grief may have strange dreams or nightmares, 
be absent-minded, withdraw socially or lack the desire to return to class 
or work. All of these feelings and behaviors are normal during grief, and 
should pass with time.
79
Grief lasts as long as it takes for the student to accept and learn to live 
with their loss. For some people, grief lasts a few months. For others, 
grief may take years to pass. The length of time spent grieving is different 
for each person. There are many reasons for the differences, including 
personality, health, coping style, culture, family background and life 
experiences. The time spent grieving also depends on your relationship 
with the person lost and how prepared you were for the loss. If a student 
expresses trouble making progress on their grief, a referral to the 
Counseling Center may be warranted.
Learn more:
} The National Students of AMF Support Network  
http://www.studentsofamf.org/grief-support-resources/college-
grief-statistics/
80
DISORDERED EATING
Eating disorders and disordered eating are important concerns on 
college campuses. It is estimated that more than 5 million Americans 
suffer from an eating disorder and even more from disordered eating 
patterns and body image concerns. While the majority of people with 
eating disorders are female, eating disorders can also affect men. Eating 
disorders and disordered eating are complicated, multi-dimensional 
problems that typically develop from a combination of psychological, 
familial, interpersonal and socio-cultural factors. Adolescent and  
college-age students are particularly vulnerable to these problems.
The reported suicide mortality rate among people with eating disorders 
is said to be 23 times higher than that of the general population, placing 
the rate of suicide among ED patients among the highest of all psychiatric 
disorders (Holm-Denoma et al, 2008; Kaye, 2008; Keel et al., 2003). These 
statistics highlight the seriousness of recognizing the early warning signs 
and encouraging students to seek support.
 We know that some of our students come to UC with eating disorders or 
disordered eating and that others will develop them during their college 
years. In terms of weight, there can be a wide range of variation from 
significantly underweight to significantly overweight.
81
Signs and symptoms
Significant decrease or increase in weight
Dressing in layers or wearing bulky clothing to hide weight loss
Distorted body image
Preoccupation with food and weight loss
Regimented/unusual eating habits or secretive eating
Food restriction, bingeing or purging behaviors
Excessive exercise
Social withdrawal (e.g., friends, family)
Low self-esteem
Perfectionism
Difficulty concentrating
Fatigue
Moodiness and/or irritability
Anxiety and/or compulsive behavior
Learn More:
} National Eating Disorders Association  
http://www.nationaleatingdisorders.org/
} National Association of Anorexia Nervosa and  
Associated Disorders (ANAD)  
http://www.anad.org/
82
POOR CONTACT WITH REALITY
It can be especially challenging and difficult when dealing with a student 
who seems to have poor contact with reality. A key characteristic of these 
students is that they exhibit thoughts or behaviors that are bizarre and 
seem to be out of touch with reality.
Signs and symptoms
Odd or peculiar beliefs that involve a misinterpretation of reality.
Hearing voices, belief that these voices are talking to them.
Seeing things that are not there.
Talking to themselves.
Laughing to self.
Disorganized speech or behavior (e.g., speech patterns that jump from one topic to 
another with no apparent connection). This may also include bizarre or incoherent 
language or writings. This may be especially noticeable when the student speaks in 
class or in their written assignments.
Failure to exhibit any emotion or displaying inappropriate emotion (e.g., laughing 
out loud in class when talking about serious topic).
The above symptoms may be indicative of a serious psychological or 
medical disorder. Therefore, it is essential when encountering a student 
who displays these symptoms to call and consult with your campus 
Counseling Center. Often these students may not see anything 
problematic with their thoughts or actions, and they may not feel a 
referral to the Counseling Center is necessary. A therapist can provide  
you with advice on how to suggest counseling to the student.
83
A student who exhibits these symptoms may elicit concern and possible 
fear from those who have interactions with them. However, it is important 
to remain calm and to understand that, in most instances, these students 
are not dangerous. Rather, it is very likely that they are feeling frightened, 
lost and overwhelmed.
Learn More:
PsychCentral
} National Eating Disorders Association  
http://www.nationaleatingdisorders.org/
} National Association of Anorexia Nervosa and  
Associated Disorders (ANAD)  
http://www.anad.org/
84
Responding to Emotionally 
Distressed Students
Now that you have learned about the signs and symptoms of various 
types of emotional distress, you may be wondering how you can best be 
of service? Faculty and staff often ask, “What should I say? What should I 
do?” If you become aware of a student in emotional distress, consider the 
following strategies:
What you can do
Speak to the student privately.
Project a calm demeanor, although this is not how you may be feeling on the 
inside. The modeling of calm behavior is very important for the student, in 
particular as they are looking to you for assistance.
Focus on specific behaviors and/or changes you’ve observed.
Listen carefully and validate the student’s feelings and experiences. (“It must be 
very difficult, tiring, and distressing to feel this ____ so often.”)
Recommend that the student consult with a counselor about their symptoms.
Be prepared for the student to deny any problem and to reject your help.
Follow up with the student. If the student was not receptive to the referral initially, 
they may be upon further reflection and/or follow-up.
If the student is willing, walk them over to the Counseling Center or allow them 
to call and schedule an appointment while they are in your office. However, if the 
student is highly impaired it may be best to contact campus police and have them 
escort student.
85
Make appropriate referrals to educational resources such as The Jed Foundation  
so the student can learn more about their symptoms and options for help  
www.jedfoundation.org/students 
Be willing to consider flexible arrangements (e.g., extension on a paper or exam),  
if appropriate, as a way to alleviate stress and instill hope.
If you have even the slightest inkling that the student might be thinking about 
suicide, ASK! Ask the student if they have thoughts of suicide. (“Have you been 
thinking about suicide?; Have you considered harming yourself?; Are you thinking of 
ending your life?”) If the student responds affirmatively, do not leave the student 
alone. If possible, walk the student over to the Counseling Center. If it is after 
business hours or on the weekend, access emergency services by contacting the 
Campus police.
What to avoid
Minimizing the student’s concerns (“But you normally seem so happy.” “Your grades 
are so good. Are you sure you’re really depressed?”)Their distress may seem irrational 
or excessive, however, it is important not to argue and be supportive. You may not 
be privy to the full extent of their concerns.
Overwhelming the student with suggestions of how to deal with their concern, or 
providing too much information for the student to process.
Making the assumption that the student's symptoms will remit without treatment.
Assuming the family knows about the student’s symptoms, or that the student has 
a family or a network of supporters.
Taking responsibility for the student’s emotional condition. Know your limitations 
and utilize your support system. It can be very taxing to deal with an emotionally 
distressed student.
86
Referrals:
} Campus Counseling Center  
(refer to Campus Resource Insert for contact information)
} Crisis Text Line  
Text 741741 anywhere, anytime 
www.crisistextline.org/
} The Jed Foundation  
www.jedfoundation.org/students
} Half of Us Campaign  
www.halfofus.com
} ULifeline  
www.ulifeline.org/
} NAMI Student Mental Health  
www.NAMI.org
} National Suicide Prevention Lifeline 24-hour crisis line  
1-800-273-TALK (8255)  
http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/
} Online Self-Assessment  
http://www.mentalhealthscreening.org/screening/collegex
87
Distress Caused by  
Trauma/Abuse
Some students may experience distress after abuse or trauma. Without 
proper support, survivors can develop post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD), Acute Stress Disorder, Adjustment Disorder, or other anxiety 
related conditions. In this section, we will provide information about 
the various types of trauma/abuse listed below and list educational 
resources for anyone interested in learning more. At the end of this 
section, you will find general tips for responding if you become aware  
that a student has suffered a traumatic experience.
Sexual Assault/Sexual Violence
Abusive Relationships
Stalking/Harassment
Hate Crimes & Incidents
Hazing
88
SEXUAL ASSAULT/SEXUAL VIOLENCE
The statistics for the sexual assault1 of college women is staggering: one in 
four or five college women will be survivors of a sexual assault during their 
college career. While approximately 90 percent of sexual assault survivors 
are female, it is estimated that 10 percent of survivors are male. While most 
sexual assaults are committed by men against women, men are also assault-
ed by women, and same-sex assaults also occur. The transgender population 
is also at risk. The majority of sexual assaults are committed by someone 
known to the survivor (e.g., an acquaintance, date, partner or former partner, 
or family member) and most of these assaults go unreported.
Sexual assault is generally defined as any sexual contact or activity that is 
forced or non-consensual. It can include non-consensual touching; threat of 
sexual assault; forced oral, anal or vaginal penetration; and penetration with 
a foreign object. Forced and non-consensual includes a person’s inability to 
give consent because of threat of harm, coercion and/or physical violence; 
due to being under the influence of alcohol or drugs, unconscious, or asleep; 
or due to mental, developmental or physical disability.
Sexual assault is a painful, traumatic event. There are many factors that 
affect and/or influence a survivor’s reaction to sexual assault including: the 
type of assault, whether the perpetrator was known or not, previous history 
of trauma and the reactions of others. There is no “normal” reaction to a 
sexual assault. There can be a wide range of individual reactions to such a 
trauma; however, many survivors exhibit some universal common responses.
The University of California is committed to offering a safe environment for 
all members of its community. All forms of sexual harassment and sexual 
1	 Sexual assault and rape are terms that are often used interchangeably to describe  
non-consensual sexual contact. For purposes of this section of the manual, the term  
sexual assault is used.
89
violence, including sexual assault, dating and domestic violence, and 
stalking violate University policy and may violate California law.
CARE, the Advocate Office for Sexual and Gender-Based Violence and 
Sexual Misconduct, was created at every UC campus to provide dedicated, 
full-time support to survivors of sexual violence, both immediately and over 
the long term. These dedicated offices ensure that survivors can reach an 
advocate whose sole responsibility is to support their needs. The advocate 
offices were launched systemwide in January 2015.
Common responses
Shock, confusion, disbelief or denial
Disruptions in routines of daily life (e.g., sleeping, eating, working)
Recurring thoughts (e.g., unwanted memories, flashbacks, nightmares)
Concerns for personal safety (e.g., fear, sense of powerlessness, loss of control)
Self-blame, guilt and/or shame (e.g., I shouldn’t have … , It wouldn’t have  
happened if … , What will people think?)
Intense feelings and emotions (e.g., anger, sadness, irritability, feelings of 
hopelessness or despair)
Reduced ability to express emotions (e.g., numbing, detachment, apathy)
Relationship difficulties (e.g., social withdrawal, difficulty with trust, avoidance  
of intimacy, loss of interest in sex)
Academic or work problems (e.g., difficulty concentrating, impaired memory, lack 
of motivation, missing class, not completing assignments)
Increased alcohol/substance use
Psychological disorders (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder, Post-traumatic Stress Disorder)
90
Learn more:
} An Abuse, Rape & Domestic Violence Aid & Resource Collection, 
http://www.aardvarc.org
} U.S. Department of Justice Office on Violence Against Women,  
http://www.ovw.usdoj.gov/index.html
} California Coalition Against Sexual Assault, http://www.calcasa.org/
} Men Can Stop Rape, http://www.mencanstoprape.org/
} Campus CARE Advocate office  
http://sexualviolence.universityofcalifornia.edu/index.html
} The National Alliance to End Sexual Violence  
http://endsexualviolence.org/
} NO MORE Campaign  
http://nomore.org/
} A Call to Men  
http://www.acalltomen.org/
91
ABUSIVE RELATIONSHIPS
Abusive relationships are marked by strategies used by one person to 
maintain power and control over the other. Because of the cycle of abuse, 
power and control, victims may feel trapped and fearful of their partner’s 
anger, violence and/or abandonment, and thus may be reticent to disclose 
information about their relationship, even when abuse is suspected. Abuse 
can be physical, emotional or verbal.
Indicators of abuse
Intimidation: Use of looks, actions or gestures, such as smashing things, 
destroying property, abusing pets or displaying weapons so as to cause fear.
Emotional Abuse: Use of put-downs, name-calling, “mind-games,” humiliation or 
guilt in an effort to erode self-esteem of partner.
Isolation: Controlling social interaction, movement and involvement with friends 
and activities. Abuser may use jealousy to justify actions.
Minimizing, Denying and Blaming: Making light of the abuse or not taking it seriously. 
Shifting blame for the abuse onto the victim; saying the victim “caused the abuse.”
Violation of Privacy: Abusive partners may read notes, emails or text messages 
from others. Abuser may go through personal belongings.
Using Privilege (For women who are abused by men): Partners may use male privilege 
to make decisions on behalf of the other person. This may include attempts to control 
aspects of academic life, requiring permission for important decisions, etc.
Coercion and Threats: Making or carrying out threats to do something to 
hurt the partner, including leaving, threatening suicide, reporting partner 
to authorities regarding some behavioral or academic violation, or making 
partner engage in illegal activity.
92
Learn more:
} An Abuse, Rape & Domestic Violence Aid & Resource Collection  
www.aardvarc.org
} U.S. Department of Justice Office on Violence Against Women  
https://www.justice.gov/ovw
} Campus CARE Advocate office  
http://sexualviolence.universityofcalifornia.edu/index.html
STALKING/HARASSMENT
Stalking is defined as the repeated following or harassment of an 
individual in the attempt to instill a sense of fear or danger. Stalkers often 
have an irrational obsession with the victim and try to gain power and 
omnipotence through control and intimidation. Stalking behavior includes 
tailing the victim as well as harassment via phone, email, social media, 
letters, unwanted gifts and unwanted attentiveness. Stalkers can be male  
or female and targets can be of the same or opposite sex.
Behaviors may include following the person (with or without the person 
knowing), secretly waiting for the person to arrive home, making 
inappropriate phone calls, obsessively communicating either directly 
or through friends of the victim, and communicating with increasing 
frequency and intensity. In some cases, the behaviors can include threats  
and intimidation. In many cases, the behavior is just annoying (multiple 
phone calls during the day), but other times it can be frightening (a 
person suddenly appears in a window of the victim's home).
93
Many states have enacted anti-stalking laws to stop this type of harassment. 
It is not possible to determine which cases will end quickly and which cases 
of intrusive contact will continue for a long time. Regardless, the victim 
of this intrusive attention can often become distracted, anxious, tense, 
sensitive and jumpy. The uncertainty of when or where the perpetrator 
may strike next can lead to tremendous fear. Interestingly, some young 
people tend to have enormous tolerance for this kind of harassment and do 
nothing, hoping it will go away.
Indicators of stalking
Indicators of someone being subjected to stalking can be emotional and/
or behavioral in nature. How a survivor presents will depend upon her/his 
own unique situation, strengths and resources. The following are only a 
handful of potential indicators reported by some survivors:
Fear of a partner, acquaintance or strangers
Sadness and/or symptoms of depression
Emotional numbness
Low self-esteem, low self-worth
Helplessness
Poor eye contact
Hyper-vigilance
Appearing isolated from family or friends
Expressing homicidal feelings towards another person
94
Appearing anxious about something that would not normally create anxiety, such 
as getting home late, going somewhere alone
A consistent pattern of making and missing appointments that is poorly explained
Restrictions placed on travel, phone use, friendships, money
Unexplained increase in absence from work or class
Learn more:
} Campus CARE Advocate office  
http://sexualviolence.universityofcalifornia.edu/index.html
} The Stalking Resource Center, A Program of the National Center for  
Victims of Crime  
http://www.victimsofcrime.org/our-programs/stalking-resource-center
95
HATE CRIMES & INCIDENTS
A hate crime is a criminal act against a person or her/his property 
because of that person’s actual or perceived race, perceived ethnicity, 
color, religion, nationality, disability, gender, gender identity, gender 
expression or sexual orientation.
A hate incident is an act that, while not meeting the legal definition of a 
crime, involves the same behaviors and targeting of underrepresented 
groups. Hate incidents are more common on college campuses than  
hate crimes.
Examples
Using force or threatening to use force to injure, intimidate or interfere with 
another person who is exercising his or her constitutional rights
Defacing or damaging another person’s property to intimidate or interfere with 
that person’s free exercise of his or her constitutional rights
Desecrating a religious symbol or displaying a swastika on another person’s 
property with the intent to terrorize another person
Vandalizing, burning or bombing a church, synagogue, mosque or other house of 
worship to terrorize other persons
96
Effects on the victim
Victims of hate crimes may suffer from more psychological distress  
(e.g., depression, stress, anxiety, anger) than victims of other comparable 
violent crimes (Herek, Gillis, & Cogan, 1999; McDevitt, Balboni, Garcia, 
& Gu, 2001). Survivors of violent crimes, including hate crimes, are also 
at risk for developing a variety of mental health problems including 
depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). PTSD 
emerges in response to an event that involves death, injury or a threat  
of harm to a person. Symptoms of PTSD may include intrusive thoughts  
or recurring dreams, refusal or inability to discuss the event, pulling 
away emotionally from others, irritability, difficulty concentrating and 
disturbed sleep. Depression, anxiety and PTSD may interfere with 
an individual’s ability to work/go to school or to maintain healthy 
relationships. It can lead to other problems such as substance abuse or 
violent behavior, and may be associated with other health problems such  
as severe headaches, gastrointestinal problems and insomnia. Similar 
to other victims of traumatic stress, hate crime victims may enjoy better 
outcomes when appropriate support and resources are made available 
soon after the trauma.
97
Effects on Communities
Hate crimes are different from other crimes in that the offender — whether 
purposefully or not — is sending a message to members of a given 
group that they are unwelcome and unsafe in a particular neighborhood, 
community, school, workplace or other environment. Thus, the crime 
simultaneously victimizes a specific individual and members of the group 
at large. Hate crimes are often intended to threaten entire communities. 
For example, a hate crime that targeted children in a religious day care 
center and an ethnic minority postal worker was intended to instill fear in 
members of these minority communities (Sullaway, 2004). Being part of 
a community that is targeted because of immutable characteristics can 
decrease feelings of safety and security (Boeckmann & Turpin-Petrosino, 
2002). Being a member of a victimized group may also lead to mental 
health problems. Research suggests that witnessing discrimination against 
one’s group can lead to depressed emotion and lower self-esteem (McCoy & 
Major, 2003). More research is necessary to document the impact of hate 
crimes on those who share the victim’s identity.
Learn more:
} Human rights Campaign  
http://www.hrc.org/resources/category/hate-crimes 
} Anti-Defamation League  
http://www.adl.org/combating-hate/hate-crimes-law/
98
HAZING
Students attending the University of California have the opportunity to 
join a wide range of groups, including athletic teams, fraternities and 
sororities, performing arts ensembles, religious groups, public service 
organizations and others. These groups, by and large, provide positive out-
of-the classroom learning experiences and, in many cases, are important 
platforms for social, cultural and interpersonal support. Entry into some 
of these groups may involve formal or informal initiation practices, which, 
in and of themselves, are not harmful to a student’s academic experience. 
There are, however, times when these practices become hazing, and are 
detrimental to the student. 
Hazing is defined as any action taken or situation created on or off campus 
that recklessly or intentionally produces mental or physical discomfort, 
embarrassment, harassment or ridicule.
You may notice when one of your students begins to be involved with a 
student group they are is wearing clothes or other identifying articles, such 
as a fraternity or sorority pin, or clothes identified with a team moniker or 
other student group logo. While those alone are no reason for concern, if 
they are linked with the above signs, they should draw your attention.
99
Facts about hazing
Hazing in any form is prohibited at the University of California.
Hazing is illegal in the state of California.
Hazing is sometimes used as a rite of passage or initiation into a campus organization.
A student may or may not know that hazing will be a part of an initiation process.
A student may or may not know how extreme hazing might become during an 
initiation process.
Hazing can be psychologically damaging and present serious physical risks 
(including death) to students.
Some of the signs of a student experiencing hazing are fatigue; having a tough 
time staying awake; an unkempt appearance; wearing conspicuously strange or 
silly clothing; falling behind in his/her work or performance; change of attitude or 
personality in class.
Learn more:
} Stop Hazing  
www.stophazing.org
100
Responding to Reports of 
Trauma or Abuse 
If you become aware of a student who is in distress caused by a trauma or 
abuse, consider the following strategies:
What you can do
Listen carefully and validate the student’s feelings and experiences. 
Recognize that the student may be feeling vulnerable and experiencing a range 
of emotions.
Remember that abusive relationships involve complex dynamics, including high 
levels of controlling behavior on the part of the perpetrator and/or denial or fear 
on the part of the survivor. Therefore, the situation may be difficult to change.
Encourage the student who is being stalked/harassed to trust her/his instincts.
Advise the student to document unwanted contacts and maintain evidence of 
harassment/stalking/abuse.
Advise the student to take precautions to increase safety, including a change in 
routine travel routes and schedules.
Let the student know that there are services available on campus that are free 
and confidential to assist and support him/her, including counseling and medical 
attention.
After providing referral information, allow the student to make his/her own 
decision about what to do next.
If the student wants to file a complaint, refer him/her to the campus police.
101
Follow up with the student. If the student was not receptive to the referral initially, 
he/she may be more open to help upon further reflection and/or follow-up.
Be willing to consider or offer flexible arrangements (e.g., extension on a paper or 
exam), if appropriate, as a way to alleviate stress and instill hope.
What to avoid
Downplaying the situation.
Not believing the student or assuming the incident was not traumatic if the student 
does not appear distressed.
Lecturing the student about poor judgment. Avoid conveying criticism, judgment 
or implying the student was somehow responsible, even if the student engaged in 
high-risk behavior (e.g., was intoxicated or high, left a party alone with someone  
he/she just met).
Pressuring students to follow any particular course of action. Provide options, 
but avoid telling the student what to do or trying to coerce him/her into seeking 
assistance (e.g., counseling, medical services).
Expecting the student to make quick decisions or changes.
Telling the student to forget about it and move on. Saying things like, “You will get over 
this,” or “You will forget all about this someday.” It is better to say that you are sorry 
that this happened to her/him, and that there are support services available to help.
Questioning the student for details about the incident. It is better to ask what  
the student may need to help her/him and to discuss the support services that 
are available.
Pressuring the student to file a police report.
Taking responsibility for the student’s emotional condition. Know your limitations 
and utilize your support system. It can be very upsetting to hear stories of trauma 
and abuse.
102
Referrals:
Campus CARE Advocate Office – this resource was created at 
every UC campus to provide dedicated, full-time support to 
survivors of sexual violence, both immediately and over the long 
term. Find your campus CARE contact information here http://
sexualviolence.universityofcalifornia.edu/get-help/index.html
} Campus Counseling Center  
(refer to Campus Resources insert)
} Campus Student Health Center 
(refer to campus insert for contact info)
} An Abuse, Rape & Domestic Violence Aid & Resource Collection  
http://www.aardvarc.org
} U.S. Department of Justice Office on Violence Against Women  
http://www.ovw.usdoj.gov/index.html
} National Center for Victims of Crime/Stalking Resource Center  
http://www.victimsofcrime.org/
} National Domestic Violence Hotline  
http://www.thehotline.org/
} National Coalition Against Domestic Violence  
http://www.ncadv.org/
} California Coalition Against Sexual Assault  
http://www.calcasa.org/
} Men Can Stop Rape  
http://www.mencanstoprape.org/
} Stop Hazing  
http://www.stophazing.org/
} Human rights Campaign  
http://www.hrc.org/resources/category/hate-crimes
103
General Health &  
Wellness Distress
Students may become distressed due to trouble with transitions, 
academic difficulties, or health and wellness concerns. In this section, we 
will provide information on the following health and wellness concerns 
and list educational resources for anyone interested in learning more. At 
the end of this section, you will find general tips for responding if you 
become aware that a student is struggling with any of these concerns.
Academic Difficulties
Adjustment/Transitions
Substance Abuse
Self-Injury
104
ACADEMIC DIFFICULTIES
University of California students are among the most academically 
gifted students in the world. They have succeeded throughout their lives; 
nonetheless, some of them will struggle at UC.
When students do not succeed at UC, the reason is virtually never that they 
are intellectually incapable of doing the work; something outside school 
gets in their way: lack of motivation or discipline, mismatch with program, 
immaturity, alcohol, illness, emotional problems, learning disabilities, 
attention deficit disorder, family issues or financial difficulties.
Many UC students who struggle academically are doing so for the first 
time in their lives. They are used to succeeding, and their reactions to 
not doing well in a course vary widely. Some students will withdraw 
into silence. Some will complain loudly that a poor grade will ruin their 
lives, derailing their plans for medical, law or business school. Some 
will doggedly persevere. No matter their response, it is vital that you 
give students the grades they earn. If you announce on your syllabus 
an attendance policy, you should abide by it. If your syllabus states that 
you will not accept late work, do not accept it. Maintaining academic 
standards is critical for your sake, for the sake of the students and for 
the sake of the university.
105
Each undergraduate college and graduate department has an academic 
advising office that is equipped to support students through their struggles. 
When a student is performing poorly, you should inform the appropriate 
academic advising office of the situation. If a student continues to insist 
that a D will ruin his or her life, refer the student to the academic advising 
office (and phone or email the office to alert the staff, in case the student 
does not follow through). Once the advising staff have been informed about 
a particular student’s difficulties, they will be able to check whether the 
student has broader problems or whether the difficulty is isolated (not all 
students, after all, will succeed in every subject).
Learn more:
} College Confidential  
www.collegeconfidential.com/
} ULifeline  
www.ulifeline.org/
} Transition Year  
http://transitionyear.org/
106
ADJUSTMENT/TRANSITIONS
Transitions are times of change that usually involve both loss and 
opportunity. Entering college is one of life’s most demanding transitions — 
arguably the most significant transition since the start of kindergarten.
Both undergraduate and graduate students face many challenging 
transitions, including degree completion and entering the work force. 
The changes inherent in a transition can produce stress and challenge 
a student’s coping resources. It is common for students to experience a 
decline in functioning (academic, social, emotional) during transitions. 
The stress can be compounded by counterproductive coping mechanisms 
such as avoidance of stress-producing situations and people, excessive 
partying, denial of academic workload and substance abuse.
Transitions can pose greater problems to students who have existing 
psychological problems or difficult life circumstances. Students going 
through a transition may benefit from counseling to enhance their 
coping efforts and prevent the onset of serious problems.
Learn more:
} Transition Year  
http://transitionyear.org/
} PsychCentral Article  
http://psychcentral.com/lib/what-i-wish-i-knew-in-grad-school-
current-and-former-students-share-16-tips/0007541
107
SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Students who abuse alcohol or other drugs cause significant problems for 
themselves and those around them. Alcohol is the most commonly used 
substance among UC students and accounts for the majority of substance-
related problems on campus. The level of alcohol and other drug use at UC is 
similar to the national average. Recent research shows that approximately  
4 out of 5 students drink alcohol and that there has been an increase in 
the number of college students engaging in binge drinking. Patterns of 
student alcohol use may be affected by many factors including gender, 
race, ethnicity, socio-economic status, family education, family history of 
alcoholism, religious orientation, as well as by fads, peer pressure and stress.
Prescription stimulants (such as Adderall or Ritalin) are also frequently abused 
by college students. Students who do abuse prescription stimulants are 
significantly more likely to also abuse alcohol and other drugs. Research finds 
that 31 percent of undergraduates can be defined as meeting the criteria for 
substance abuse and 6 percent meet the criteria for dependency. While the level 
of abuse drops among graduate students, the rate of dependency does not.
College students may utilize alcohol and other substances in an attempt to 
deal with the many stresses of college life as well as a way to try to cope and 
manage symptoms of anxiety and depression. Alcohol and other substances 
may initially seem to provide an outlet or relief for students, a way to “have 
fun” or “relax”, but can lead to further problems. According to the National 
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), the consequences 
of alcohol use for college students are wider and more destructive than 
commonly realized. Alcohol use by college students may lead to and/or 
contribute to interference in academic performance, relationship loss/changes, 
accidents, assault, drunk driving, alcohol abuse or dependence, vandalism, 
unsafe sex, sexual assault or date rape, alcohol poisoning and even death.
108
Faculty and staff may become aware of student alcohol/substance problems 
when it affects the student’s classroom behavior or academic performance, 
or if they encounter a student coming to class intoxicated or high.
Signs and symptoms
Decline in class attendance (e.g., tardiness, disappearance from class for long 
periods of time, sick more frequently)
Decline in academic performance (e.g., missed deadlines, not performing at usual 
level of competence)
Physical signs (e.g., bloodshot eyes, slurred speech, poor hygiene, sudden weight 
loss or gain)
Behavioral signs ( e.g., avoiding eye contact, fatigue, hyperactive)
Changes in mood (e.g., depression, emotional instability, angry, irritable,  
aggressive behavior)
Learn more:
} National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism  
www.niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol-health/special-populations- 
co-occurring-disorders/college-drinking
} The Association of Recovery in Higher Education (ARHE)  
http://collegiaterecovery.org/
} Transforming Youth Recovery  
www.transformingyouthrecovery.org/
} Half of Us  
www.halfofus.com/
109
SELF-INJURY
Self-injury is sometimes called “deliberate self-harm,” “self-mutilation,” 
“cutting” or “non suicidal self-injury.” Self-injury typically refers to a 
variety of behaviors in which an individual intentionally inflicts harm to 
his or her body for purposes not socially recognized or sanctioned and 
without suicidal intent. Self-injury can include a variety of behaviors but 
is most commonly associated with intentional carving or cutting of the 
skin, subdermal tissue scratching, burning, ripping or pulling skin or hair, 
swallowing toxic substances, self- bruising and breaking bones.
Detecting and intervening in self-injurious behavior can be difficult since 
the practice is often secretive and involves body parts that are relatively 
easy to hide. Unexplained burns, cuts, scars or other clusters of similar 
markings on the skin can be signs of self-injurious behavior. Other signs 
include: inappropriate dress for season (consistently wearing long sleeves or 
pants in summer), constant use of wrist bands/coverings, unwillingness to 
participate in activities that require less body coverage (such as swimming 
or gym class), frequent bandages, odd or unexplainable paraphernalia  
(e.g., razor blades or other implements that could be used to cut or pound), 
and heightened signs of depression or anxiety.
Creating a safe environment is critical for self-injurious young adults. Avoid 
displaying shock or showing great pity. The intensely private and shameful 
feelings associated with self-injury prevent many from seeking treatment. 
It is important that questions about the marks be non-threatening and 
emotionally neutral. Evasive responses from those engaging in self-injury 
are common. However, concern for their well-being is often what many  
who self-injure most need; persistent but neutral probing may eventually 
elicit honest responses.
110
Signs and symptoms
Scars from burns or cuts
Fresh cuts, scratches, bruises or other wounds
Broken bones
Keeping sharp objects on hand
Wearing long sleeves or long pants, even in hot weather
Claiming to have frequent accidents or mishaps
Spending a great deal of time alone
Pervasive difficulties in interpersonal relationships
Statements of helplessness, hopelessness or worthlessness
Learn more:
} The Cornell Research Program on Self-Injury and Recovery  
www.selfinjury.bctr.cornell.edu/index.html
} Half of Us  
www.halfofus.com
} ULifeline  
www.ulifeline.org
111
RESPONDING TO GENERAL HEALTH & WELLNESS DISTRESS
If you become aware of a student who is in distress caused by general 
health and wellness concerns consider the following tips and referrals:
What you can do
Listen carefully and validate the student’s feelings and experiences.
Express your genuine concern for the student, focusing on specific behavior 
and/or changes you’ve observed (e.g., irregular class attendance, deteriorating 
academic performance, marks on their arms).
Allow the student to respond to your concerns and observations.
Be prepared for the student to deny any problem and to reject your help.
Set appropriate and firm limits with students (e.g., it’s not acceptable to come to 
class intoxicated or high).
If the student comes to class intoxicated or high, is disruptive and refuses to leave, 
contact the campus Police for assistance.
Encourage the student to use positive coping strategies to manage transition 
stress, including regular exercise, use of social support, a reasonable eating and 
sleeping regimen, and scheduling pleasurable activities. (“Tell me what you have 
done in the past that worked when things have been tough.”)
Refer a student to the Counseling Center. He or she may be feeling high levels 
of emotional pain, and may also be experiencing anxiety and/or depression. One 
goal of therapy is to help the student express their feelings and to develop more 
adaptive coping mechanisms to deal with their distress.
Follow up with the student after making the referral. If the student was not 
receptive to the referral initially, he/she may be more open to help upon further 
reflection and/or follow-up.
Be aware of your own feelings and reactions. It is natural to feel frightened, 
overwhelmed and helpless.
112
What to avoid
Punishing the student for maladaptive behaviors. 
Assuming that the student understands the impact of their behaviors and is aware 
of the source of stress.
Discounting or overlooking factors that put the student at risk for more serious 
problems. (“Everyone goes through this and I am sure it is nothing to worry about.”)
Denying or ignoring your observations of the student’s academic or behavioral 
changes.
Attributing common signs of alcohol/substance use or abuse to “experimentation.”
Ignoring or tolerating the student’s disruptive behavior.
Communicating your concern in a critical and/or judgmental manner.
Arguing with the student if he/she expresses denial of a problem.
Trying to force a disruptive or intoxicated student to leave the class. In these cases, 
call campus police.
Making comments that are judgmental of their self-injury or tell the person to 
stop the self-harming behavior. This may more likely exacerbate the behavior.
Overreacting, as it is important to remain calm. It can be very anxiety provoking 
when you see marks indicative of self-injury or a student tells you they are engaging 
in this behavior. Remember that engaging in self-harm does not necessarily mean 
someone is trying to kill themselves.
113
Referrals:
} Campus Student Health Center 
(refer to campus insert for contact info)
} Campus Counseling Center  
(refer to campus insert for contact info)
} Campus Alcohol and Drug Program  
(refer to campus insert for contact info)
} Campus Collegiate Recovery Program  
(refer to campus insert for contact info)
} Campus Disability Services Center  
(refer to campus insert for contact info)
} ULifeline  
www.ulifeline.org
} Half of Us  
www.halfofus.com
} The Association of Recovery in Higher Education (ARHE)  
http://collegiaterecovery.org
114
Distressing & Disruptive 
Students
On occasion, you may find a student whose behavior is causing distress 
for you or others. These types of concerns vary greatly but can be broadly 
categorized by those who are excessively demanding or dependent, and 
those who are aggressive or perceived to be potentially violent.
In this section, we will review common signs and symptoms for each type 
of concern and list educational resources for anyone interested in learning 
more. At the end of this section, you will find general tips for responding 
to students who are distressing.
Excessively Demanding/Dependent
Aggressive/Potentially Violent
115
EXCESSIVELY DEMANDING/DEPENDENT
Over the course of interacting with students, there are invariably some 
students whose personal styles create interpersonal difficulties for those 
around them. These students often present with a sense of entitlement, 
are unwilling to listen, cannot take “no” for an answer, exhibit disrespect or 
verbal abuse toward others, or act in a persistently demanding way.
Some students arrive on college campuses with interpersonal skills honed in a 
less stressful environment where less is expected of them and more support is 
available, or where they have not been allowed to act independently. Students 
may be used to operating in a smaller academic community, where it is easier 
to access needed information, parental figures are available to help and much 
more of their life is structured for them. When faced with greater challenges 
in a larger community, students may find that they are overwhelmed and lack 
necessary skills to adroitly negotiate college situations.
Students who are demanding can be intrusive and persistent and may require 
more time and attention. Demanding traits can be associated with anxiety, 
panic, depression, personality problems and/or thought disorders, mania, 
drug use/abuse.
It is important to be aware of your own tolerance level and what you can offer 
the student on any particular day and time. If you are relatively free from 
other responsibilities at the moment, you may feel more able to respond. On 
the other hand, if the same student has returned for help day after day, or, for 
whatever reason your own stress level is high, it might be advantageous to ask 
a colleague for help. With the help of a colleague it can sometimes be easier to 
set boundaries, to check lists of resources, to get another opinion on the level 
of the student’s distress and to not carry the burden of a student whose needs 
are expressed in demanding or time-consuming ways. Developing a plan that 
will help the student acquire necessary skills may involve a variety of helpers, 
from academic, counseling and other student services.
116
Signs and symptoms
A sense of entitlement
An inability to empathize
A need for control
Difficulty in dealing with ambiguity
Often intrusive and persistent
A strong drive for perfectionism
Difficulty respecting structure, limits and rules
Dependency on others to take care of them 
Fears about handling life
Elevated mood
Drug use or abuse
Inability to accept any limits
Learn more:
} National Behavioral Intervention Team Association (NaBITA) 
https://nabita.org 
117
AGGRESSIVE/POTENTIALLY VIOLENT
It is very difficult to predict aggression. When a student is faced with a 
frustrating situation that is perceived to be insurmountable, the student 
may become angry and direct that anger toward others. Yet, in spite of 
recent high-profile tragedies, a student acting out violently is a fairly 
rare event.
Developmentally, stressors may increase for a student who has coped 
marginally before leaving home. Additionally, the access to drugs or alcohol 
for some may increase the propensity for more aggressive behavior. Certain 
social situations also may elicit aggressive responses. In some cases, the 
aggression may be indicative of the onset of a mental health disorder.
Violence cannot be predicted, but there are some indicators that suggest 
a person may have the potential for violence. These include having a 
prior history of family violence or abuse, volatility or inability to control 
aggressive impulses due to organic or learned behavior.
Unfortunately, in dealing with individuals, you do not always know the 
historical or immediate background of a particular student. Therefore, it is 
important to be able to understand your own sense of safety and to ask for 
assistance if you feel threatened.
118
Signs and symptoms
Frequently, assault is predicted on the basis of observing hostile, suspicious 
and agitated behavior. In the absence of the above symptoms the presence 
of hyper-vigilance (i.e., looking around a lot), extreme dependency, or 
delusions and hallucinations may be risk factors. Other signs and symptoms 
that may indicate a potential loss of control are fearfulness, anger or 
predatory behavior. Verbal communication may be loud and pressured.
If there is an imminent threat of harm, call the campus police immediately. 
Learn more:
} National Behavioral Intervention Team Association (NaBITA) 
https://nabita.org 
119
Responding to Distressing 
Students
If you find yourself working with a distressing student, consider the 
following responses:
What you can do
Talk to the student in a place that is safe and comfortable.
Remain calm and take the lead. (“Tell me what is bothering you and then let’s 
decide what solutions there might be.”)
Set clear limits up front and hold the student to the allotted time for the 
discussion. (“I have 10 minutes today, and so within that time, what can I try and 
help you with?”)
Emphasize behaviors that are and aren’t acceptable. (“If you want me to continue 
with this, I will need you to be as respectful of me when you are talking as you 
would want me to be respectful of you.”)
Respond quickly and with clear limits to behavior that disrupts class, study 
sessions or consultations.
Be prepared for manipulative requests and behaviors. (“You came asking for my 
help and I have offered you several ideas, but they do not seem okay with you. 
What ideas do you have?”)
Maintain a posture that is poised, ready to move quickly, but not fearful.
Maintain a voice quality that is matter-of-fact, monotone.
Use clear, assertive statements of consequences; repeat as necessary.
120
Use eye contact sparingly — only to emphasize a point.
If you feel it is appropriate to continue meeting with a distressing/aggressive 
student, remain in an open area with a visible means of escape (keep yourself at a 
safe distance, sit closest to the door and have a phone available to call for help).
Use a time-out strategy (ask the student to reschedule a meeting with you after 
he/she has more time to think).
Enlist the help of a co-worker (avoid meeting alone or in a private office with  
the student).
Assess your level of safety and be cognizant of your intuition. Call the campus 
police if you feel the student may harm him/herself, someone else or you.
Additionally, there may be protocols for dealing with urgent or emergency 
situations within your college or school that you will want to familiarize yourself 
with, so that you are prepared when the need for this information arises.
What to avoid
Arguing with the student. (“No, you are not correct and I do not agree.”)
Giving in to inappropriate requests.
Adjusting your schedule or policies to accommodate the student.
Ignoring inappropriate behavior that has a negative impact on you or other students.
Feeling obligated to take care of the student or feeling guilty for not doing more.
Allowing the student to intimidate or manipulate you to not deal with the 
problematic behavior.
Staying in a situation in which you feel unsafe.
Ignoring signs that the student’s anger is escalating (body language, clenched fists).
121
Becoming hostile or punitive toward the student.
Engaging in a screaming match or behaving in other ways that escalate anxiety 
and aggression.
Making threats or dares.
Touching the student or crowding his or her sense of personal space.
Ignoring a gut reaction that you are in danger.
Referrals:
} Campus Police or 911  
(refer to Campus Resource Insert)
} Dean of Students  
(refer to Campus Resource Insert)
} Campus Counseling Center  
(refer to Campus Resource Insert)
06
Supporting 
Graduate/
Professional 
Students and 
Postdoctoral 
Scholars
Supporting Graduate/Professional Students and Postdoctoral Scholars
The pressure I am experiencing in 
graduate school is starting to consume 
me. I think I have a problem. It seems 
that whenever I get stressed or whenever 
I am tired … which is almost everyday, I 
get symptoms of obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. For example, before I sleep I 
have to squirm around in my bed and  
do rituals before I can fall asleep. Before 
and during tests, I perform repeated 
rituals with my legs or pencil before 
I start on the exam, even though the 
solutions are in my head. It is getting 
worse as the weeks pass and I don’t  
know what to do.”
—Anonymous Student 
Supporting Graduate/Professional Students and Postdoctoral Scholars
125
Graduate/Professional Students: 
A Vulnerable Population
The information in this text can be applied to all students, including 
graduate and professional students, who are entitled to the same mental 
health services as undergraduate students. However, there are complexities 
in fostering healthy learning environments for graduate and professional 
students that vary from working with undergraduates.
Very few studies have explored the prevalence of mental health problems 
among psychology graduate students.
•	
A 2009 survey conducted by the American Psychological Association 
found that 87% of psychology graduate students reported experiencing 
anxiety, and 68% reported symptoms of depression. Even suicidal 
thoughts — with a prevalence of 19% — were relatively common.
•	
The Spring 2015 American College Health Association - National 
College Health Assessment II (ACHA-NCHA II) suggests while we 
have made some improvements, mental health is still a major concern 
among graduate students. Within the last 12 months:
»»
39.5% of students felt things were hopeless
»»
30.9% of students felt so depressed it was difficult to function
»»
53.4% of students felt overwhelmed with anxiety
»»
5% of students seriously considered suicide
SUPPORTING GRADUATE/PROFESSIONAL STUDENTS  
AND POSTDOCTORAL SCHOLARS
126
UC trends are slightly higher than National statistics.
•	
In April 2004, the Mental Health Task Force at UC Berkeley conducted 
a survey to collect data on graduate students’ mental health needs, 
their knowledge of health resources available on campus, and their 
satisfaction with department climate. Findings included the following: 
»»
In the last 12 months, 45.3% of respondents had experienced an 
emotional or stress-related problem that significantly affected 
their wellbeing and/or academic performance. 
»»
9.9 % of respondents seriously considered suicide in the past  
12 months
•	
A follow-up study seeking to identify predictors in life satisfaction and 
depression in graduate students was released in 2014 as the Graduate 
Student Happiness and Well-Being Report, published by the Graduate 
Assembly in partnership with Graduate Division. The report noted the 
following 10 predictors:
1.	
Career Prospects
2.	
Overall Health
3.	
Living Conditions
4.	
Academic Engagement
5.	
Social Support 
6.	
Financial Confidence
7.	
Academic Progress & Preparation
8.	
Sleep
9.	
Feeling Valued & Included
10.	 Advisor Relationship
•	
Finally, a review 2016 of usage rates for all graduate students across 
the UC system revealed the following:
»»
The top reported concerns for graduate students are anxiety, 
depression, and relationship issues 
»»
21% of all graduate students are utilizing campus counseling services
127
»»
19% of those student are reporting some level of suicidal ideation
»»
20% have engaged in some form of self-harm behavior (without 
the intent of suicide)
»»
14% are taking psychotropic medication
Supporting Graduate and 
Professional Students
Graduate study at the University of California is varied and complex. 
There are a multitude of major and minor fields of study, and a range of 
degrees awarded. Such academic freedom comes with the responsibility 
to think independently, act responsibly and pursue one’s research with 
self-directed passion.
Graduate/professional students are far more likely to be international and 
more diverse in age, background and experience than undergraduates. 
They are at various life stages, with a greater variety of accompanying 
family members and responsibilities. All graduate/professional students 
will need support by faculty members, either as chair or member of 
a special committee, instructor in graduate-level courses or primary 
investigator in funded research. An individual faculty member may not 
need to be responsive in all of these roles, but the faculty member who 
interacts most with the student should strive to offer the full gamut of 
support. The nine points on the following pages have been identified as 
essential criteria for supporting graduate students:
128
1	
Clear communication of your expectations  
and policies
It is the responsibility of faculty members to lay out expectations 
and policies and explain in detail how things operate in their lab 
or class. Written expectations are most helpful. Being rigid is not 
advised, but rather laying the groundwork for building a mutually 
beneficial relationship based on clear expectations. You might 
consider these questions in writing your expectations:
How frequently do you prefer to meet?
How much time do you have available to work with the student?
What do you consider a normal workload?
Do you prefer final drafts for review or do you accept works in progress?
How much turn-around time do you need for letters of 
recommendation?
What are your policies on co-authorship?
Are your relationships with students strictly academic, or are some 
personal as well?
129
2	
Approachability, availability and regular check-ins  
with students
It is important for graduate/professional students to have someone 
they feel comfortable coming to for assistance — someone 
who is invested in them and who cares about their well-being 
academically, professionally and personally. Although students 
are responsible for keeping in touch with you, it helps to keep 
them accountable if you also stay in touch with them regularly. If 
students are struggling and know they don’t have to see you for 
months, they may not make timely progress toward completing 
their degree. Here are some ideas to help you maintain good 
contact with your graduate students:
Give mentees your undivided attention in meetings with them.
Check in with mentees at least once a semester.
Be friendly in the hallways and at field events.
Invite students to stop by during office hours.
3	
Familiarity with resources within, and external to,  
the department
You will be expected to provide students with, or help them 
find, the resources they need, whether those involve funding, 
equipment, psychological support or any other resource that 
will benefit them as students. You should be able to point your 
students in the right direction when a need arises.
130
4	
Supporting expanding student networks and 
providing professional development opportunities
One of the most effective ways to support students’ academic and  
professional interests is to give them exposure to professional 
activities and important people in your field. For example, 
introduce them and promote their work to colleagues at 
conferences and other professional gatherings. Encourage your 
students to attend and present at conferences, and help them 
obtain the financial resources they’ll need to do so. You can give 
ongoing support to your students’ professional development by 
reviewing their grant writing, research projects, TA duties, guest 
lectures in your classes or job market preparation.
5	
Valuing students’ decisions, priorities  
and need for balance
When you set expectations and timelines or assign tasks, keep in 
mind that students have other priorities to juggle. It’s important 
that students have time to keep their lives balanced and healthy. 
Faculty should familiarize themselves with university policies on 
assistantships and the university’s academic calendar, so that if 
questions arise about the structure or duration of students’ work 
assignments, you can provide information.
131
6	
Familiarizing students with graduate school  
and academia
Another way to assist students is to familiarize them with the 
practices of the field and discipline and help them integrate into 
the program’s communities. Such integration is an important 
predictor of degree progress and completion. For most of your 
students, graduate school is their first exposure to professional 
scholarship. Therefore, even if the bureaucratic procedures are so 
familiar to you that they seem simple, they can be daunting for 
graduate students who feel that they hear conflicting messages 
about everything from paperwork deadlines to field requirements. 
Make sure you have the most recent copies of your program’s and 
the Graduate School’s guidelines. Introduce students to “unwritten” 
or vague rules of graduate education, including expectations about 
funding, publishing, coursework and program timelines.
7	
Providing honest, supportive, timely  
and detailed feedback
It is important that graduate students are treated as professionals 
by the faculty. Students who are treated as “junior colleagues” are 
more likely to complete their degrees than those who feel they 
are treated as “adolescents” (Herzig, 2004). Treating students with 
respect, fairness and objectivity — especially when their work 
may not be meeting expectations — is critical to their success. 
Respectful academicians will read a student’s work and return it 
to him or her expeditiously with comments that show they have 
engaged with the student’s ideas. They are either supportive of the 
direction the student is taking or they are constructive with their 
feedback on why they are not.
132
8	
Being responsive to the needs of a diverse  
student body
Retention of minority students — those who belong to a group 
that experiences prejudice, stigma or discrimination — presents 
the greatest challenge to increasing overall graduate/professional 
student retention rates, because these students are the least likely 
to complete their graduate degrees. Graduate school is difficult for 
all students, but it is often more so for students who face obstacles 
that arise due to differences in race, sexual orientation, gender, 
disability, age and socio-economic background. The following 
suggestions can make you more aware and sensitive to this issue:
Learn students’ backgrounds, values and motivations.
Recognize your own biases.
Read information, attend programs and participate in discussions  
that focus on issues faced by people from backgrounds different from  
your own.
Confront discrimination among colleagues and students.
Refine syllabi, assignments and reading material with an eye  
toward inclusion.
133
9	
Providing ongoing encouragement  
and support
Most students experience bouts of insecurity and anxiety at some 
time. It is important to help them recognize that this is normal. 
Since you most likely experienced similar low points in graduate 
school yourself and clearly made it through successfully, you can 
provide ongoing encouragement. Faculty can instill confidence 
by telling students when they are doing a good job and helping 
them build the knowledge and skills they need to do their work 
well. Encourage your students to follow their interests and support 
them through the fleshing-out of incipient ideas that may or may 
not end up at the center of future research projects. Students 
should have the freedom to choose their research interests and 
receive the support they need regardless of how those interests 
relate to those of their mentors.
Refer to your Campus Resource Insert for additional information on 
services for graduate students). 
134
Supporting Postdoctoral 
Scholars
By definition, a postdoctoral scholar has received a doctoral degree and 
is pursuing additional research, training or teaching to pursue a career in 
academia, research or a practice field. Postdocs work closely with a faculty/
staff mentor and play a crucial role at the university; they supplement the 
research expertise of faculty by sharing new techniques, collaborating 
with other institutions and helping to manage the daily operations of 
a laboratory, research or practice setting. They also may contribute by 
teaching and advising in support of undergraduate and graduate students, 
making them an integral part of the university.
Postdocs consistently report these concerns
Lack of communication 
Poorly established goals/lack of understanding of goals
Not knowing whom the research belongs to
Challenges applying for grants
Trouble networking at conferences and beyond
Language barriers/cultural issues
Family issues
Isolation in the lab 
Dual couple issues
Lack of jobs 
135
Faculty/staff mentors are such an important part of the postdocs’ 
professional lives and can help the postdocs work on most of those 
issues by adhering to the recommendations for supporting graduate/
professional students (noted in the previous section).
Mental Health Resources for Postdoctoral Scholars
Postdoctoral scholars are NOT eligible for the same mental health 
resources as our undergraduate and graduate/professional students.
Postdocs have a unique set of benefits which are managed through 
your campus' postdoc/visiting scholar office.
Refer to Campus Resources Insert for contact information.
07
What Faculty 
& Staff Can 
Do to Reduce 
Stress
What Faculty & Staff Can Do to Reduce Stress
Last year, I had a professor who took 
it upon himself to learn the names of 
many of the students in his class, which 
is amazing because the class was over 
150 students. Every day I would walk in 
and he would say, ‘Hey Jayson, how are 
you?’ Although such a gesture is small, it 
really did make a difference. Sometimes 
it turned a bad day into a hopeful one.”
—Anonymous Student 
What Faculty & Staff Can Do to Reduce Stress
139
Am I Causing Undue Stress?
Despite good intentions, in your pursuit to push our students towards 
academic excellence, have you ever considered you may be the cause of 
undue stress? High achieving students are often already highly critical of 
themselves. Combine that with a predisposition towards mental illness, 
and perceived hostile treatment from a professor (who they may idolize), 
the effects can be crippling. While one approach is to build resilience in 
our students (which we are actively working towards), we also ask that our 
faculty and staff reflect on their own interactions with students. Consider 
the following:
Do you often encourage competition between your students?
When you have to turn down a student’s request, do you offer 
alternatives or leave them to figure out next steps on their own? 
Are you quick to hand out criticism, or are you extremely thoughtful 
about giving negative feedback?
Has a student ever left your office crying after communicating about 
their work? 
Has a student ever told you they were afraid to come to your office 
hours or that you seem unapproachable?
WHAT FACULTY & STAFF CAN DO TO REDUCE STRESS
140
Do you find yourself feeling impatient or even annoyed when 
communicating with students?
Do you require students to provide a medical note for an absence?
Have you ever been dismissive of a student when you felt his/her 
complaint/concern was unfounded?
If you examined your interactions, would you notice a difference in 
how you treat your higher vs. lower achieving students? What about 
other categories of students?
Given how demanding your job can be, do you find yourself feeling 
stressed and overwhelmed by your own responsibilities?
After reflecting on the questions above, if you find yourself answering yes 
to any of these items, it is possible you are unintentionally contributing 
to student distress. We truly believe that each of you do the best you can 
every day. As we become more aware of how our actions impact others, 
we have an opportunity to do better. The rest of this chapter is dedicated 
to providing education and resources to help you provide an environment 
where our students are free from undue stress by staff and faculty.
141
FOUNDATIONS FOR SUPPORTING STUDENTS
The college years are a time when a student’s focus of life changes from 
family and home to the college community. Relationships between parents 
and children change and evolve into relationships between parents and 
young adults. This evolution varies by culture as well as by individual family. 
Students are forming a new identities that integrate the many contexts in 
which they live.
Today’s students face intense pressure to succeed. Guidance, support and help 
from faculty and staff can ensure the creation of a living-learning environment 
where students can productively face many issues for the first time.
As faculty and staff, we can better prepare ourselves when we understand 
the developmental tasks facing students:
•	
Becoming Autonomous: managing time, money and other resources, 
taking care of oneself emotionally and physically, working independently 
and interdependently, and asking for help.
•	
Establishing Identity: developing a realistic self-image, including 
an ability to handle feedback and criticism, defining limitations and 
exploring abilities, and understanding oneself in culture.
•	
Achieving Competence: managing emotions appropriately, developing 
and pursuing academic interests, identifying and solving problems, 
becoming confident and competent, and preparing for careers and  
life-long learning.
•	
Understanding and Supporting Diversity: meeting people from diverse 
backgrounds, encountering differences and learning to honor the gifts  
of others.
•	
Establishing Connection and Community: learning to live respectfully 
with and among others, and developing skills in group decision-making 
and teamwork.
Helping Students Understand 
& Manage Stress
The college years can be a time of discovery and excitement. Those of 
us who work with students strive to incorporate those qualities into our 
teaching and our work. At the same time, the developmental tasks that are 
particular to the college years can be taxing and difficult. Stress responses 
can be triggered by positive experiences, such as falling in love or acing an 
exam, or by negative experiences, such as an unexpected loss, some form of 
the stress continuum
performance (physical and mental)
healthy tension
142
low
some form of disappointment or a traumatic event. As a positive influence, 
stress can compel us to action, move us into our “peak performance zone” 
and bring a sense of excitement or exhilaration to our lives. As a negative 
influence, it can result in fatigue, anxiety and feelings of helplessness. In 
other words, stress is what our bodies and minds experience as we adapt 
to a continually changing environment.
Stress occurs on a continuum. To maintain healthy tension, a person  
must balance the right amount of stimulating challenges with a  
healthy diet, a consistent sleep schedule, regular exercise and stress 
management techniques.
stress level
high
imbalance
breakdown
peak 
performance
143
144
While most students would like to be in the peak performance zone every 
day, this is not humanly possible. However, by maintaining healthy tension, 
an individual can access the extra burst of energy and focus needed to 
achieve peak performance when needed most (e.g., on the day of an exam).
When students perceive that a situation, event or problem exceeds their 
resources or abilities, their body reacts automatically with the “fight 
or flight” response. If this response persists over time, or results from a 
sudden significant change, it can lead to imbalance and health problems 
such as heart palpitations, insomnia, eating disorders, fatigue, panic 
disorders and feelings of hopelessness or depression.
Excessive and/or prolonged levels of stress lead to imbalance and 
physical, emotional and social breakdown. This experience of imbalance 
may present as a difficulty concentrating, disorganization, forgetfulness, 
deterioration in quality or quantity of work, irritability and exaggerated 
personality traits. To re-establish balance, the person needs to strengthen 
his or her stress-management practices, learn new coping strategies or 
seek support from others.
If stress is left unchecked, symptoms will worsen, causing severe physical 
complaints, illness, feelings of anxiety, hopelessness and/or depression. 
The student may be so despondent that he/she skips class or a job, 
socially withdraws or takes unnecessary risks with personal safety. At  
this breakdown point, it is essential for the student to seek professional 
medical or counseling assistance.
145
When stress impedes functioning, many people benefit from a combination 
of lifestyle changes, affirmative interpersonal relationships, counseling, and/
or medication. Faculty, staff and graduate teaching/research assistants 
can support students by reinforcing healthy lifestyle behaviors, addressing 
classroom behavior or other concerns when first noted and communicating 
that seeking assistance when needed is a sign of strength. 
The suggestions that follow outline general best practices that can be 
applied to the classroom setting. Consider adopting these practices as your 
contribution to fostering a healthy learning environment for our students.
Get to Know Your Students
Foster Cooperation vs. Competition
Be Clear in Expectations and Communication
Evaluate Students without Causing Undue Stress
Open Possibilities vs. Closing Doors
Prepare Teaching Assistants to Be Most Effective
146
Get to Know Your Students
Create a welcoming environment for all students. Social support and a 
sense of a larger community promote well-being and are the best insurance 
against stress and self-harm. UC students overwhelmingly state that they 
want to be part of a supportive community. They want to get to know and 
work with their professors and bond with the staff.
Suggestions
Learn your student’s names. You may not be able to learn them all, but don’t let 
this stop you from learning as many as you can.
Throughout orientation week, some departments sponsor social events such as 
meals in the dining halls, club outings, picnics or barbecues, and sporting events. 
Please attend! These are another way for departments and faculty members to 
create a dynamic that ensures a comfortable atmosphere for students.
Consider making a student-professor meeting a course requirement.
147
Foster Cooperation  
vs. Competition
Extreme competition and stress can lead to increased depression, antisocial 
behavior and substance abuse. Isolation is a factor in suicide as well as in  
violent behavior. Social connectedness is a predictor of well-being, even 
more so than income or educational attainment.
Most faculty agree that some level of student stress is a motivating force 
but wonder what can be done both inside and outside of the classroom to 
help minimize unnecessary stress. Group work decreases stress, fosters 
team building and combats the isolation.
Suggestions
A public space or lounge area draws students to your department and provides 
opportunities for informal interactions between students and faculty. It also 
provides a place to post information and a meeting space for student organizations.
Cooperative Groups in Class — Pose a question to be worked on in each 
cooperative group and then circulate around the room answering questions, 
asking further questions, keeping the groups on task and so forth. After an 
appropriate time for group discussion, students are asked to share their  
discussion points with the rest of the class.
Active Review Sessions — In the traditional class review session, the students ask 
questions and the instructor answers them. Students spend their time copying 
down answers rather than thinking about the material. In an active review session, 
the instructor poses questions and the students work on them in groups. Then 
students are asked to show their solutions to the whole group and discuss any 
differences among solutions proposed.
148
Be Clear in Expectations  
and Communication
Students feel more at ease when they know what will be expected of them 
from the start. This information is helpful for decision making and time 
management. Clear and consistent communication enables students to 
get the most out of their undergraduate education. Without accurate 
information, students feel that everyone else is doing well and that they  
are the only ones struggling.
Provide clear expectations orally and in writing from the first day of class. 
Include information about what the students can expect from you as the 
professor and what you expect from the student. Provide multiple ways to 
gain knowledge. Provide regular feedback.
“My prof said this course is going 
to be totally easy — that makes 
me feel stupid if I don’t get it. 
This class was sooo hard.”
 —Anonymous First-Year Student
149
Suggestions
When writing your course syllabus, consider including the following items:
Overall course objectives; consider the personal tone that you set as an important 
aspect of the syllabus
Course format, so students know how you will be using class time
Your expectations of student responsibilities (such as participation and the level  
of work)
What assessment techniques you will use to evaluate students, including 
information on grading policies
A schedule of class dates and topics, along with week-by-week reading assignments
Due dates for papers, exams, and projects, including policies about late assignments
Any pertinent information about academic policies and procedures (such as class 
attendance, making up assignments and universitywide policies)
Consider adding the following statement to your course syllabus: 
 
Mental Health & Wellness 
As a student you may experience a range of issues that can cause barriers to 
learning, such as strained relationships, increased anxiety, alcohol/drug problems, 
depression, difficulty concentrating and/or lack of motivation. These mental health 
concerns or stressful events may lead to diminished academic performance or 
reduce a student's ability to participate in daily activities. UC offers services to 
assist you with addressing these and other concerns you may be experiencing. If 
you or someone you know are suffering from any of the aforementioned conditions, 
consider utilizing the confidential mental health services available on campus. I 
encourage you to reach out to the Counseling Center for support (insert website 
link and phone number). An on campus counselor or after-hours clinician is 
available 24/7.
150
Evaluate Students without 
Causing Undue Stress
Have a clear purpose for each assignment. Prepare your students by 
giving exams that simulate the real world. Let students know where  
they stand academically.
Test in the same manner in which you teach. Be sure that a test measures 
what students have learned. Provide specific feedback and corrective 
opportunities. Grade inflation is a problem — 95 percent of students think 
that they are failing if they don’t get all As. On the other hand, a mean 
of 30 can be psychologically devastating. Negotiating flexibility can be 
difficult while also striving for academic excellence.
“I’m in a few classes where I have a lot 
of assignments worth 10 percent of 
my grade. I take them seriously, but 
it’s not as stressful.”
 —Anonymous Arts & Science Student
151
Suggestions
Test exams on a colleague before handing them out to your class. Students get 
stressed when there are mistakes in an exam.
Consider untimed exams. While this is vital for students with some learning 
disabilities, it can also reduce tension for mainstream students.
Consider providing practice exams or old exams or review sessions for an exam.
Establish a formalized mechanism through which students can appeal project/
paper deadlines or ask for an exam make-up. For example, rather than setting a 
make-up exam date and time at the beginning of the semester, provide the make-
up exam based on the group of students who have communicated (through the 
formalized mechanism) that a different date is needed (e.g., for religious reasons 
or significant health concerns).
Consider allowing students illness/personal absence days without requiring 
documentation from a medical provider. This not only causes students to 
"medicalize" their needs, but uses up valuable staff resources for truly ill students.
“Anything that counts for a large 
percentage of my grade, even if it’s only 
something like 25 percent, is very stressful. 
It makes me nervous that if I don’t do well, 
it will be difficult making up the grade.”
 —Anonymous Humanities Student
152
Opening Possibilities vs. 
Closing Doors
Challenge the thinking that students must get into the one and only top 
graduate school or field. Emphasize that there are lots of graduate schools, 
opportunities and careers and that they will find something that will work 
for them.
Suggestions
Many departments have instituted web pages, weekly emails, bulletin boards 
or newsletters for majors to communicate departmental information.
Students, particularly freshmen, find these sources of information helpful in 
visualizing future jobs and finding undergraduate research opportunities, teaching 
assistant opportunities internships, and summer jobs. Students who are informed 
about activities will remain connected to the department.
Students in departments with undeclared majors should have the opportunity 
to sign up for newsletters to make the transition into a major as smooth and as 
informed as possible.
“There is so much stress and competition, 
especially for pre-meds. If I don’t make it to 
medical school, what will I do with my life?”
 —Anonymous Arts & Science Student
153
Prepare Teaching Assistants 
to Be Most Effective
Teaching Assistants often know more about students than faculty and 
are often the first ones to notice when something is wrong. Ensure that 
your TA’s receive proper training and are equipped with the knowledge 
to recognize and respond to signs of distress. Consult your Counseling 
Center for TA mental health training options.
Suggestions
When given the option, hire TAs not because they received high grades in your 
course but for their ability to teach and relate well to students.
Make holding office hours a top priority for TAs; require them to post their office 
hours and be there for those hours. Question if TAs prefer to be available in the 
evenings, perhaps up to 11 p.m. in a library, and encourage them to offer email 
hours for students to contact them in the evenings. You might be surprised that 
some TA’s would prefer evening hours.
Have TAs work in pairs.
Have TAs take attendance and report students who are regularly missing sessions 
or seem to be struggling, so resources can be offered. 
Ask the TA to phone or email any students who miss class.
Encourage your TAs to participate in mental health gatekeeper training offered by 
your Counseling Center.
154
Focus on Strengths
College students will need to draw upon their own strengths, resilience 
and sense of social connectedness to help them maintain mental health 
and wellness.
Often, students who begin to struggle are consumed by an intense focus 
on avoiding failure. Research on achievement motivation suggests that 
students whose motivation to avoid failure is greater than their motivation 
to succeed are more likely to expect negative outcomes when faced with 
challenges, have increased cognitive anxiety, ruminate on failure, exhibit 
avoidance behaviors and generally underperform. On the contrary, students 
whose motivation to succeed is higher than their motivation to avoid failure 
are often more future-oriented, more willing to be involved in innovative 
activities, more apt to see challenges as motivating and often push limits to 
solve complex problems.
155
Suggestions
Working “with” students who are struggling (as opposed to working  
“on” students) will help them to feel more motivated, in control and  
more invested in the outcome. Some questions you can ask a struggling 
student include:
How did you deal with this before? 
Who is on your team? 
What are your greatest strengths and how can you use them now? 
What do you think is going to happen? 
How do you stay well? 
What are your goals? 
What should you be worried about? 
What would your hero/parent/mentor advise?
156
Faculty & Staff Testimonials
We asked faculty and staff throughout the 
system how the mental health of students 
impacts their jobs and why learning about 
mental health is important. We hope their 
stories inspire you.
“As I was working in the residence halls, I noticed that a student was acting different 
than before in my previous interactions. She was angrier and showing more hostility 
to other students. Other students were being impacted by her behavior in a negative 
way. I pulled the student aside and asked if she was ok. She got irate with me and 
started yelling and saying statements that life does not matter and no one cares. I 
told her that I did care about her and I wanted her to succeed and reach her goals. I 
ended up calling Berkeley Mental Health to get her evaluated. I feel it is important 
to recognize and respond to students in distress because we are all a part of the 
[UC] community and need to exhibit an ethic of care for one another. We need to  
be active bystanders and look out for one another and reach out to help folks that 
are needing it. Every student deserves care and concern on our campus.”
Nicole Lowy
RESIDENT DIRECTOR, UC BERKELEY
157
“I am proud to be part of a campus community, and particularly Student Affairs at 
UC Santa Barbara, that is devoted to ensuring the success of our students. Being 
involved with helping to sustain a healthy campus through the provision of mental 
health services makes us stronger. We are all truly inter-connected. Support, team 
work and compassion go a long way as we care for our students, particularly those 
who are facing stressful situations. It takes courage and true interest to speak up 
when you notice a student in distress, whether you are a staff member, a professor, 
or a friend. As director of a counseling center, I am so pleased that we have 
individuals who take the time to let students know that they care and help guide 
them to appropriate resources. Thank you!”
Jeanne Stanford, Ph.D.
DIRECTOR, COUNSELING & PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES, UC SANTA BARBARA
“I think that UC Merced is in a unique position with our student population being so 
small. We have the ability to create these awesome connections with students that 
a lot of other UCs are not able to do because of their size. While a large amount of 
students are able to cope with stress and the demands of college life, some are not. 
We have a due diligence as an educational institution to ensure that each student is 
allotted the ability succeed in their educational journey, however, each journey looks 
different. When dealing with students in distress, some small changes in behavior 
could be something much bigger under the surface. These small stresses in life, if not 
dealt with correctly can lead to alcohol and/or substance abuse, harmful behaviors 
and possibly suicide. I think it is also about creating an environment of trust so 
that the students know that they have an ally within you and helping to normalize 
help-seeking behaviors. Sometimes just reaching out to a student and having a 
brief conversation with them can help them to understand their importance.”
Jennifer Quiralte
COORDINATOR, GRADUATE STUDENT SERVICES, UC MERCED
158
“It is so important we all look out for each other in our communities. We all 
experience difficult times whether a result of a loss, personal hardship, or a more 
enduring problem. But, in the end, the strength of our community is measured  
by how well we care for and look out for each other.”
Patty Mahaffey
DEAN OF STUDENTS, MUIR COLLEGE, UC SAN DIEGO
“All of us who work in a university need help from time to time. When students 
come to me with problems, I let them know about all of the resources available to 
them. I also make sure that they know that I reach out for help at times, too.”
Lynn Mally
PROFESSOR OF HISTORY, UC IRVINE
“After 23 years as Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs at UCSB, I am more certain than 
ever of the importance of placing student mental health and wellness at the very top 
of my list of priorities. The well being of each and every student is a basic building 
block to a healthy and safe campus environment as well as to student academic 
and personal success. By educating the campus community about the warning 
signs of distress, and caring enough and knowing how to intervene ourselves when 
necessary, we are embracing the citizenship aspect of our Student Affairs motto — 
Scholarship, Leadership, Citizenship. Our hope is that our students will embrace 
both their own well being and the well being of their community so that they can 
go out in the world and share the talents they have cultivated on our campus as 
accomplished scholars, competent leaders, and active citizens.”
Michael D. Young, Ph.D.
RETIRED VICE CHANCELLOR FOR STUDENT AFFAIRS, UC SANTA BARBARA
159
“Probably because of our background in psychology, my faculty colleagues and I are 
acutely aware of symptoms of psychological distress and issues that our students 
might exhibit. Personally, there were several instances when I have noticed 
psychological distress in a student. One of my earlier experiences (2011 or 2012) 
came when an undergraduate student came to my office hours to get help since he 
had not been coming to lecture. He said he felt so “low” that he couldn’t get out of 
bed and that he “hearing things.” He admitted that he occasionally thought about 
killing himself. I convinced him to walk with me to our counseling center and we 
sat in the lobby for a few minutes until someone could see him. More recently, our 
group suffered a professional and personal loss in the death of a founding faculty 
member of our university and group. His death affected all of us, but especially a 
few students in particular. After discussing the situation with her, the Counseling 
Center Director came to a graduate course to discuss grief and inform students of 
the support they could get on campus. I have not doubts that this was a significant 
source of comfort to our students.”
Anna V. Song, PhD 
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY
CHAIR, PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCES GRADATE GROUP, UC MERCED
“I first took an interest [in mental health] when I saw an increasing number of 
students with conduct issues also presenting other things like depression and 
stress. I think there is a close connection between student conduct and mental 
health and it kind of got to a point where I realized I needed to educate myself 
more about the mental health side.”
Courtney O’Connor
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, STUDENT HOUSING, UC DAVIS
160
“I recently met with a student for a standard 60-minute academic skills consultation 
that ended promisingly. One week later, I was surprised to find him slumped in front 
of my office with his head in his hands, the look on his face one of distress. A project 
with a partner had turned out so poorly that he had a reasonable expectation of 
receiving a low grade in the crucial pre-requisite course, meaning he wouldn’t make 
it into even his second-choice major. He kept calling himself a failure mumbling 
ways in which he could punish himself appropriately and/or exact retribution on 
his partner. Feeling that I likely represented the student’s last chance to develop a 
healthier view of this situation, I had a helpful conversation with the student about 
the big-picture context of that particular group project and his major as a whole. 
Recognizing and responding to distressed students is perhaps the most important 
part of my job…. As that situation unfolded and the protocols for such circumstances 
flashed through my head, I realized that all the unused hours of training I’d received 
in this area were paying off at that moment. I was able to help the student find 
new ways of looking at what otherwise could have been a catastrophic incident. It 
was my most difficult test to date, and years of doing my homework on distressed 
students was what made it possible for me to pass.”
Paul Rivas, M.A.
ACADEMIC SKILLS COORDINATOR, CAMPUS LEARNING ASSISTANCE SERVICES, UC 
SANTA BARBARA
“When we admit students to graduate school we have high hopes for their success. 
Counseling and Psychological Services is a key resource for me as I work with 
students to achieve that success.”
April Bjornsen
ASSISTANT DEAN OFFICE OF GRADUATE STUDIES, UC SAN DIEGO
161
“One night I was walking out to my car and heard someone crying. While the 
student was clearly trying to conceal themselves from public view, I stopped, 
introduced myself and asked if I could sit with her for a while. I spent about an 
hour listening to the student, as she confided in me that she was overwhelmed 
with schoolwork, thoughts that she was not smart enough to be at UC Merced, 
additionally she was struggling with family expectations and making friends on 
campus. I asked and received confirmation that the student wasn’t having any 
thoughts of suicide, but was struggling with anxiety in regards to coursework 
and social environments. I established a time for her and I to meet the next 
morning, where we walked from her residence hall to the [counseling center] to 
schedule her an appointment to meet with a counselor. The student continued  
to use [counseling] throughout the year and checked in with me periodically.”
Jenni Plueard 
RESIDENCE LIFE COORDINATOR, UC MERCED
“I have used [the Red Folder] and think it really breaks it down in such a way that 
it’s very clear how quickly we can connect someone to the right resources. It really 
makes it clear that we don’t need the professors or staff members to be the experts, 
there are [mental health] experts who get paid and have tons of expertise in these 
things. I think whenever we see distressing behavior, when someone is acting 
out in any way, whenever we see behavior that is alarming to us, I think there is a 
tendency to withdraw and perhaps try to avoid it and refocus on others. I think that 
is a disservice and we need to take the time to take a look at resources like the Red 
Folder, which is a great resource.”
Kirk White
CONDUCT COORDINATOR & ASSISTANT DIRECTOR
STUDENT CONDUCT AND COMMUNITY STANDARDS, UCLA
162
“Having spent the past ten years in the student conduct arena on campus, my 
daily tasks focused on dealing with behaviors with students that violated policy 
and landed them in our conduct process. On many occasions, the students being 
addressed had underlying mental health concerns that were at the root of their 
disruptive and/or distressing behaviors. As a certified drug and alcohol counselor,  
I was particularly in tune with of the struggles that many of our students had with 
the misuse of substances and with addictive disorders.”
“I recall one situation in which a student was facing very serious criminal charges due 
to credit card fraud, having stolen from their roommate to feed their addiction to 
prescription medication. In a conduct hearing with this student, it became evident 
to me that the student’s behaviors had become unmanageable due to their addictive 
disorder and we immediately began work to address the root of the behavior. 
Following intensive inpatient treatment and the implementation of university 
sanctions tailored to assist the student with their ongoing sobriety, I was thrilled to 
see this student thrive, go on to graduate and enter into a Masters level as a young 
person in long-term recovery.”
“If we had not been able to assist this student with identifying and addressing her 
disease, their path most probably would have been very different.”
Audrey L. Pusey, M.Ed., CADC, ICADC
INTERIM DIRECTOR OF CASE MANAGEMENT, UC RIVERSIDE
“Too many students feel that they need to solve all their problems on their own. We 
need to help them realize that seeking help is an act of strength, not of weakness.”
Susan Smith, Ph.D.
CHAIR, PROVOST, JOHN MUIR COLLEGE, UC SAN DIEGO
163
“Once, I met with the department chair of a graduate program, and one of the 
Graduate Advisors in Grad Division, to discuss a student of concern. The student 
appeared to be struggling with personal issues that were impacting their ability 
to successfully complete their TA responsibilities. The three of us were able to 
propose a resolution where the student could take a leave from their TA duties 
but still stay in school, plus an additional loan for temporary assistance. I was 
the liaison between the Chair & Grad Division in presenting the proposal to the 
student, who gratefully accepted the resolution.”
“The student’s distress was noted and the staff member reached out to the student 
and actively engaged supportive resources. It is important that we let the students 
know that we care and that they are not just a name on a roster. Also by reaching 
out to resources with them, we model problem solving techniques so that they are 
empowered to advocate for themselves in the future.”
Penny Key, LMFT
STUDENT AFFAIRS LEAD CASE MANAGER, UC RIVERSIDE
“A number of students have shared – verbally and in written reflections – that they 
feel alone in addressing their personal and academic problems. Their inability to 
ask for help (because of cultural stigma, family or personal pride or just ignorance 
of the resources available) plus the perceived lack of faculty caring can accelerate a 
student’s physical/mental dysfunction as well as academic failure; then we all lose.”
Eleanor M. Vogt RPh, Ph.D.
HS CLINICAL PROFESSOR, UC SAN FRANCISCO, SCHOOL OF PHARMACY
164
“I am a psychologist at Counseling and Psychological Services and my husband is 
the Chief of Police at UCSB. We have noticed that sometimes when students who 
are having mental health problems do not get professional help, their behavior can 
become disruptive and problematic to the campus community. Occasionally, these 
students of concern actually engage in behavior that gets them into legal trouble 
by committing acts of aggression or other criminal activities. However, when 
those students are willing to talk with a mental health professional and allow us to 
provide them with better coping skills, resources, and referrals, they are able to feel 
better, perform well academically, and have satisfying relationships. So, we would 
like to encourage faculty and staff who see students (or colleagues) who seem 
overwhelmed by stressful life situations to urge them to 'get help before they get  
in trouble!'”
Kirsten Olson, Ph.D.
PSYCHOLOGIST (UCSB) & DUSTIN OLSON, M.S.; CHIEF OF POLICE, UC SANTA BARBARA
“During a meeting with a student, I noticed that she was incredibly polite but would 
not give me eye contact, had delayed speech, exhibited odd behaviors and rambled 
incoherently. The student’s grades were suffering and she was not connected to 
any resources on campus. The student expressed that culturally counseling is 
unacceptable but after conversation she would be willing to try it once. I walked  
her to the counseling center on campus. I entered into higher education to provide  
a safe and engaging learning environment while simultaneously help students 
be their best self. Therefore, when a student is in distress it is crucial for me to 
acknowledge it and respond in the most appropriate way for the situation.”
Akirah J. Bradley
ASSISTANT DEAN OF STUDEXNTS, UC BERKELEY
165
“It’s important to be aware and recognize students who are in distress so we can 
respond to their current emotional state with empathy and understanding while 
helping them problem solve their issues. Students need to have someone to 
share their intense feelings with and help guide them to calmer and more rational 
solutions. A lot of students keep their problems and feelings inward and as stress 
of the quarter builds, family pressures escalate, relationships end or they fail their 
first midterm. Their problem tends to escalate and the feelings become unbearable 
which can lead to intense and negative feelings. Without someone to step in or 
notice their distressed feelings a student could find themselves in the unfamiliar 
territory of a deep depression and possibly feeling suicidal.”
“In my brief few months here at UC Riverside as a Case Manager I have received 
several thank you letters from students and parents for helping their student 
navigate this difficult time. It’s so rewarding to help the students find their way 
and to be a part of their life at this most important time.”
Laurie Lee, LMFT
STUDENT AFFAIRS CASE MANAGER, UC RIVERSIDE
“Our primary mission is to support students on their educational journey, and part 
of that journey involves learning to cope with stress and formulating a balanced 
approach to life. The stressors and challenges that students encounter can be 
profound. It is part of our charge as educators to guide students to the most 
effective resources when studying or writing a paper; by the same token, we 
should be responsive to students in distress and provide them with the tools  
they need to succeed emotionally as well as academically.”
Steven Adler, Ph.D.
PROFESSOR OF THEATRE AND PROVOST, EARL WARREN COLLEGE, UC SAN DIEGO
166
“One of my students was having trouble concentrating and completing her work, and 
as we talked, she shared with me that a recent traumatic experience seemed to be 
the cause. It was clear that she was in real need, and that the problem wasn't going 
to go away on its own. I was so grateful to be able to refer her to someone I knew at 
Counseling and Psychological Services. The student let me know later that seeing a 
therapist there had made a huge difference to her moving forward in her life.”
Dana Nelkin, Ph.D.
PROFESSOR AND DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES, PHILOSOPHY,  
UC SAN DIEGO
“When a student is experiencing a time of distress, it can feel consuming, unending, 
and alienating. If things spiral out of control, it can lead to consequences that 
change that student’s life trajectory. Providing support can make a key difference. 
You can really change someone’s future by reaching out and making a connection.”
Maryam Kia-Keating, Ph.D.
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR - DEPARTMENT OF COUNSELING, CLINICAL, AND  
SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY, UC SANTA BARBARA
“It is vital that faculty, staff, and other members of the campus environment 
recognize student distress. Although distress does pass, it can have lasting effects. 
On one level, distress can impair student’s physical health and cognitive abilities. 
On an extreme level, the outcome distress can be irreparable harm to the student 
and those around them in the form of suicide or violence. If we can catch students  
in distress, we can prevent all of those potential outcomes.”
Anna V. Song, PhD 
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY
CHAIR, PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCES GRADATE GROUP, UC MERCED
167
“Expectations are high and the pace is fast and furious in a health science educational 
environment. For a variety of complex reasons high achieving students are often 
reluctant to say or show they are having difficulty. Countless times students have 
said to me they are "having difficulty concentrating", which is frequently another 
way of saying "I have a problem and don't know what to do". When this happens, 
I stop and listen for as long as the student wants to talk, without judgment and 
without rushing ahead to offering solutions.  Sometimes that's all that is necessary, 
and sometimes the best thing I can do is to successfully refer the student to 
someone who is better equipped to help him or her resolve their problem.”
Eric Koenig
DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF STUDENT LIFE, UC SAN FRANCISCO
“If a student reacts badly or inappropriately to receiving low grades, or after being 
caught violating the academic integrity policy, it may be a sign that he or she is 
under significant emotional distress. Students who act out or seem to have bad 
boundaries might be isolated, and have no outlet for frustrations or difficulties 
stemming from other situations in their lives. As a younger teacher, I worry about 
“reaching out” on a personal level to students who seem to have authority issues 
or poor professional boundaries. However, if a student’s behavior is problematic 
enough that I have those kinds of concerns, it’s a sign that someone needs to 
assess what’s going on with that student and make sure he or she is doing okay.
Sarah Cavill, Ph.D.
CANDIDATE, ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES DEPARTMENT, UC SANTA CRUZ
168
“A student disclosed to me that he was abusing multiple drugs, putting himself 
at great risk. During a thorough assessment, I discover the presence of a severe 
depressive disorder. The student’s lack of understanding of the etiology of his 
emotions led him to substance abuse as a way to cope with his distress. I educated 
the student on his symptoms and offer treatment. He gained understanding and 
engaged in medication treatment and therapy. He is now clean and sober and 
performing well academically.”
Edwin Feliciano, M.D.
PSYCHIATRIST, BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES DIRECTOR, UC SANTA BARBARA
“It is a privilege to help students through their struggles and witness growth and 
sometimes, transformation.”
Jerry Phelps, Ph.D.
PSYCHOLOGIST, UCSD COUNSELING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES, UC SAN DIEGO
“At our university, faculty and staff provide academically excellent programs that 
have a creative slant and expressive freedom to them. I strongly believe that in 
order for our students to thrive intellectually and achieve their unique potentials, 
we need to provide a healthy and balanced environment. I hope that we can be 
attuned to students' struggles and support them during their moments of greatest 
vulnerability. If we can reach out to students in a timely manner, oftentimes we 
can assist in either preventing or remediating a crisis situation.”
Doylene Chan, Ph.D.
COUNSELING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES, UC SANTA CRUZ
169
“I was speaking with a student who had just been financially cut off from her parents 
because she “came out” as queer to them. She was dealing with a lot of stress, 
emotional issues, and very practical issues, such as not having a place to live since 
having no money for rent. The student had obvious behavioral and mood changes, 
and during a conversation she said, “I just wish I could die right now. I don’t think 
I can take this anymore.” I was alarmed by this comment and given her current 
situation knew she was under much stress. I asked more questions about how she 
was feeling, if she had any thoughts of harming herself, and what I could do to help. 
I gave the student my phone number the 24-hour counseling number, and then 
notified the student mental health coordinator of the situation. I followed up with 
the student and she was able to cope with the situation successfully.”
Joshua Moon Johnson, Ed.D.
DIRECTOR, LGBT RESOURCES/RESOURCE CENTER FOR SEXUAL AND GENDER DIVERSITY, 
AND NON-TRADITIONAL STUDENT RESOURCE CENTER, UC SANTA BARBARA
“I was so glad that I was already very familiar with our campus resources and 
procedures before a student reached out to me.  As a staff member I had been in 
multiple meetings with this student, but had recently noticed a change in their 
appearance and behavior.  The student asked to meet with me on a separate 
matter and during our conversation I asked some open-ended questions about 
how things had been going for them. We ended our meeting with my walking 
them down to our counseling offices for a crisis appointment.”
De Acker
DIRECTOR, CAMPUS CLIMATE, UC MERCED
170
“It is so important to pay attention and look for the signs that something may 
be troubling someone you know and care about. So often, I will see a student in 
Counseling and Psychological Services (CPS) who was referred by a friend, an 
adviser, or a professor. The students are often overwhelmed with emotion that 
someone took the time to reach out to them to check in and offer support. The 
students will usually tell me that they never would have come to the counseling 
center otherwise and are relieved to finally be getting the help they wanted and 
needed for some time now.”
Stephanie T. Ho
COUNSELING PSYCHOLOGIST III, UC BERKELEY
“The most important role of an academic advisor is to listen and respond especially 
in times of distress with concrete suggestions of where help and support can be 
found on campus or in the community. Early intervention is a crucial step that could 
prevent a more serious outcome. The overall mission of the campus to educate the 
community (students, staff and faculty) about the signs, symptoms and support 
should be one of the highest priorities.”
Mary Rae Staton
STAFF GRADUATE ADVISER – ENGLISH DEPARTMENT, UC SANTA BARBARA
“While striving to achieve our educational mission, we must always remain 
sensitive and committed to students who appear to be in distress. A "culture of 
caring" is essential for a healthy university community. Staff and faculty are in 
a unique position to personally reach out to students and help them to access 
campus resources designed to support their success. A simple gesture of genuine 
concern can make a huge difference in the life of a student who is having difficulty.”
Eric Koenig
DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF STUDENT LIFE, UC SAN FRANCISCO
171
“I truly value the collaboration that comes from working with Student Affairs staff, 
RA’s and RD’s, concerned faculty, and other personnel in identifying and responding 
to students in distress. Students in distress often suffer in silence. Showing concern 
gives voice to such students. Your concern also aids in identifying problems early. 
Sometimes your concern is evident through the referrals you make to CAPS. 
For these many reasons, we at CAPS are very appreciative of all the university 
community who are on the “front lines” in responding to distressed students.  
Please know that you play a vital role in contributing to the mental health and 
wellness of [UC] students!”
Darren Del Castillo, Ph.D.
PSYCHOLOGIST, UC SANTA BARBARA
“As a mental health professional, my work with students in distress repeatedly 
demonstrates for me the importance of a community network of support. No 
individual mental health provider can be as successful working in isolation with a 
student in distress as they can be when they have the support of the network of 
campus community members who also significantly impact the student’s life. The 
students who I have seen come out on the other side of their crisis the most  
successful have always had the involvement of administrative staff, faculty, their 
families, and social support networks. It is our job to activate such a network for  
every student in distress to the best of our ability.”
Negar Shekarabi, Psy.D.
SR. STAFF PSYCHOLOGIST, UC IRVINE
172
“As a lecturer who teaches writing-intensive classes, I have a great privilege. Students 
write about everything and, especially in these times of social media, they don't  
seem to hold back much on what they write about. Because of supportive counseling 
colleagues at UCSB, I have "called for backup" when one of my students is in distress. 
The support I get on my campus keeps my own stress levels down and allows me to 
focus on my work.”
Don Lubach, Ph.D.
ASSISTANT DEAN OF STUDENTS, DIRECTOR OF 1ST YEAR & GRADUATE INITIATIVES,  
UC SANTA BARBARA
“Every student at [UC] is a valuable person with tremendous potential. In order 
to realize that potential, faculty and staff must work together with the student to 
insure a feeling of security and wellbeing. If this is not achieved, our educational 
pursuits will be thwarted, and collectively, we will have failed to allow full 
development of the student's potential.”
Milton Saier, Ph.D.
PROFESSOR OF MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, UC SAN DIEGO
“In my clinical work, I have found over and over again that social nurturance is 
one of the most powerful factors preventing possible crises from developing 
among distressed students. Don’t underestimate a simple act of support or 
encouragement you can easily deliver. Your care does make a difference in the 
lives of those who are in need.”
Isabella Lin-Roark, Ph.D.
PSYCHOLOGIST, UC SANTA BARBARA
173
“If a student whose arm has shot up in class one day appears the next in my office 
hours with that arm in a cast, I know how to be empathetic and understanding. 
If a student comes to me in mental distress, how do I recognize the signals? What 
can I do to express my concern about her or his well-being? How can I help? I am 
a professor of history, not psychiatry or psychology, but as a trained professional, I 
know that when I have questions I can’t answer, I should turn for help to other 
trained professionals — mental health care providers — on my campus. By taking 
advantage of the training and education they offer, I can more readily recognize a 
student in distress and know how best to respond and offer assistance”
Robert Moeller
PROFESSOR OF HISTORY, UC IRVINE
“I believe that our most valuable assets on campus are our faculty, staff and clinicians 
who take the time to truly know their students, to recognize when concerns may be 
brewing and who outreach to make caring referrals to experts trained to assess and 
assist with those concerns. Our actions in responding to a student who is struggling 
makes all the difference in the outcome for that student. We should always be striving 
to assist students in eliminating the shame they may associate with their mental 
health disorders. We must create environments in which students know that we are 
committed to helping them be well and where judgment is removed. I believe that 
having caring community of campus professionals and a strong peer support system 
is key in breaking down stigma related to mental health and addictive disorders.”
Audrey L. Pusey, M.Ed., CADC, ICADC
INTERIM DIRECTOR OF CASE MANAGEMENT, UC RIVERSIDE
174
“Over my time within Graduate Student Services and serving the graduate 
community at UC Merced, I have developed strong ties and bonds with some 
students. We have connected over the years and because this is such small 
campus, our interactions are frequent. One particular instance has to do with  
a female graduate student that was an active participant in academic and non-
academic events and programs. She was outgoing, energetic, excited about 
her research and engaged with faculty, students and staff. I started to notice 
a decline in her attendance at events and programs, as well as a shift in her 
behavior. Over the period of a couple of months she became less active, agitated, 
avoided conversations and would frequently cry when asked how she was. I was  
able to schedule a one-on-one with her and she let me know that she was having 
major issues with her advisor. She was to the point where she felt like her only 
option was to just leave grad school at UC Merced and move back home. We 
met over a couple of different sessions and discussed her options because her 
ultimate goal was to continue and finish grad school. Over the course of our 
meetings we scheduled a session with the Campus Ombuds as well as a session  
with the [counseling center]. She has sought out professional help on a regular 
basis (I’m not sure if it is on-campus) and is graduating this semester.”
Jennifer Quiralte
COORDINATOR, GRADUATE STUDENT SERVICES, UC MERCED
175
176
NOTES
177
NOTES
178
NOTES
179
NOTES
University of California
Student Affairs
1111 Franklin Street
Oakland, CA 94607-5200
