For Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
Psychological First Aid
A Short Introduction to 
CONTENTS
What is Psychological First Aid (PFA)?.........................................4
Who needs PFA?.........................................................................6
When do you provide PFA?.........................................................6
Where do you provide PFA?.......................................................6
Who can provide PFA?................................................................7
How do you provide PFA?...........................................................7
	
Look......................................................................................... 9
	
Listen..................................................................................... 11
	
Link	........................................................................................ 14 
PFA for children........................................................................... 18
PFA in groups – support to teams............................................... 20
Do no harm..............................................................................22
	
	
Looking after yourself...............................................................24
Useful referral information.......................................................26
4
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
What is Psychological First Aid (PFA)?
PFA is a set of skills and knowledge that can be used to help people 
who are in distress. It is a way of helping people to feel calm and able 
to cope in a difficult situation. 
•	 
Stress 
Stress is a state of pressure or strain that takes place in many 
different situations. It can be caused by any change – positive or 
negative. Stress is an ordinary part of everyday life. It is positive 
when it makes a person perform well, for example, in a test or 
exam. However, stress can also be negative and lead to distress 
and crisis.

Distress
This is when someone is unable to cope with or adapt to the
challenges or situation they are facing. Distress leads to physical 
and emotional discomfort and suffering. It can be caused by a 
one-off crisis event or from stress building up over time.
5
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
PFA involves caring about the person in distress, paying attention to 
their reactions, active listening and giving practical help. It is a way of 
supporting and connecting someone to the help they need. 
PFA skills include knowing:
•	 how to assess a situation
•	 about common reactions to crises
•	 how to approach someone in distress
•	 how to calm someone who needs it
•	 how to provide emotional support and practical help.
•	 
PFA is…
•	 comforting someone in distress and helping them feel safe and calm 
•	 assessing needs and concerns
•	 protecting people from further harm 
•	 providing emotional support
•	 helping to address immediate basic needs, such as food and water, 
a blanket or a temporary place to stay 
•	 helping people access information, services and social supports.

PFA is not…
•	 something only professionals do
•	 professional counselling or therapy
•	 encouraging a detailed discussion of the event that has caused 
the distress
•	 asking someone to analyze what has happened to them
•	 pressing someone for details on what happened 
•	 pressuring people to share their feelings and reactions to an event. 
6
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
Who needs PFA? 
PFA can be of help to anyone in distress. However, not everyone 
who is in distress may need or want PFA. Some people can manage 
difficult situations on their own or with help from others and may not 
need your help. 
PFA can help people who are going through personal crises, including 
social or health challenges. It is also an important part of larger scale 
responses to disasters, conflict and violence and forced migration. 
Remember
•	 people react in different ways and at different times to crises
•	 not everyone wants or needs PFA
•	 seeing or hearing something frightening can lead to distress
•	 some people can manage on their own and do not need help.
When do you provide PFA? 
PFA can help at different times after a crisis event. Most people need 
PFA during or shortly after a crisis. Others may feel distress much 
later: weeks, months or even years after an event. New challenges or 
reminders of the crisis, such as anniversaries of the day, may set off 
memories and lead to distress. 
Where do you provide PFA? 
You can provide PFA anywhere safe and comfortable for the helper 
and person(s) in distress. It can be in a home, community centre, 
shopping centre, school, etc. If possible, choose a place that is quiet 
and calm. 
7
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
For sensitive situations, such as if someone has suffered sexual 
violence, try to find somewhere where other people cannot overhear 
your conversation. This keeps things confidential and respects the 
person’s dignity. 
Who can provide PFA?
Everyone can provide PFA – volunteers, first responders, members of 
the general public. It is not something only professionals can offer. 
PFA skills are not difficult to learn. Most people already know and 
use them without realising they are PFA skills. Examples are active 
listening, giving help without judgment, calming someone in distress, 
and dealing with someone’s immediate needs.
How do you provide PFA? 
Look, Listen and Link 
The actions you take in PFA depend on the situation and needs of 
the people you are helping. There are three basic sets of actions 
– look, listen, and link. 
8
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
You may not need to take all of these actions. Sometimes you many 
need to do an action more than once, or in different orders. 
LOOK  for
•	 information on what has happened and is happening
•	 who needs help
•	 safety and security risks
•	 physical injuries 
•	 immediate basic and practical needs 
•	 emotional reactions.
LISTEN  refers to how the helper
•	 approaches someone
•	 introduces oneself
•	 pays attention and listens actively 
•	 accepts others’ feelings
•	 calms the person in distress
•	 asks about needs and concerns 
•	 helps the person(s) in distress find solutions to their immediate 
needs and problems.

LINK  is helping people
 
•	 access information
•	 connect with loved ones and social support
•	 tackle practical problems 
•	 access services and other help.
9
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
LOOK FOR
•	 information on what has happened and is happening 
•	 who needs help
•	 safety and security risks
•	 physical injuries 
•	 immediate basic and practical needs 
•	 emotional reactions.
CASE
Juan was driving home from work late at night on a dark country road. 
Suddenly, he noticed the shadow of a cow in the lights of an oncoming 
car coming towards him. A few seconds later, the car hit the cow. 
Juan stopped immediately and thought carefully about the situation and 
what he should do. His first priority was to stop other accidents from 
happening. He did this by slowing down the traffic on the other side of 
the road. He then ran to the car that had landed upside down, while 
calling for an ambulance.
When Juan reached the car, he saw that the driver had managed to 
crawl out and was walking away from it. He was almost falling over and 
seemed dazed. Juan went up to him calmly and said he was there to 
help. He took his jacket off and put it around the driver. He asked the 
man if he was injured, or if any part of his body hurt. The driver was 
holding his arm. He said he thought it might be broken. Juan led him 
to his own car and asked him to sit in the back seat. He explained that 
he had called the ambulance and the police and that the man was safe 
now. He told the man he should try to keep his arm as still as possible 
until more help arrived. The man sat staring straight ahead, looking 
completely dazed. He told Juan that he had thought he was going to die 
when the car flew into the air.
Juan said he would also have been afraid if it had happened to him. He 
offered him some water and said he would stay with him till more help 
arrived.
10
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
Signs of severe distress that need referral 
for specialised services:
Sometimes emotional reactions are so strong that they affect the 
way people live their everyday lives. If this continues for more than 
a few days, you should refer them to professional mental health 
support, if available.
Someone needs specialised help if they
•	 have not been able to sleep for over a week and seem confused 
•	 are so distressed that they are unable to live their lives in the 
usual way and to care for themselves or their children. For 
example, they may not be eating well or keeping themselves 
clean, even if they have food and access to toilets
•	 lose control and it is difficult to know what they are going to do 
•	 threaten to harm themselves or others
•	 start abusing drugs and/or alcohol. 
People living with a psychological disorder or taking medication 
before they become distressed may also need continued 
professional mental health support.
11
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
LISTEN
LISTEN refers to how the helper
•	 approaches someone
•	 introduces oneself
•	 pays attention and listens actively 
•	 accepts others’ feelings
•	 calms the person in distress
•	 asks about needs and concerns 
•	 helps the person(s) in distress find solutions to their immediate 
needs and problems.
‘Listen’ is the way the helper communicates with the person(s) in 
distress from the moment they approach and start to interact with 
them. 
Listening is not only what we do with our ears. That is hearing. 
Listening is being present, paying attention, and trying to understand 
what has happened to the person(s) in distress. It is about being 
aware of what they are feeling and what they need. It is being open, 
interested, and sensitive to what the distressed person is experiencing. 
It is also recognizing when someone does not want to talk, and 
allowing silence.
12
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
CASE
Calming and active listening 
Tom was walking down the street when he heard screaming and 
commotion coming from one of the shops on the other side of the 
road. Then he saw a man running out of the shop, with a big bag 
and a gun in his hand. The man ran to a car, jumped in and sped 
away.
Tom ran across the road and into the shop. There was a woman 
behind the counter who was screaming and crying loudly. She 
seemed to be having a panic attack so Tom said loudly but calmly 
that she was safe, and that the robber had gone. He told the 
woman he would call the police and he would stay with her till 
they came.
The woman started to calm down. She was still having trouble 
breathing, so Tom found a chair and asked her to sit down. He 
gently guided her to breathe more calmly. He asked her to quietly 
feel the air going all the way into her stomach when she took a 
breath. She reached for his hand and held it tightly. She told him 
she felt sick and thought she was going to vomit. Tom said he was 
right there and would stay with her till she felt better.
After a little while, the woman started breathing normally. Tom 
fetched her a glass of water and quietly asked her how she was 
feeling. She took the glass and nodded and quietly drank the water. 
When Tom saw she was calmer, he said he had seen the robber 
coming out of the shop with a gun. He waited and the woman 
spoke. She told Tom she had been very afraid. She said she 
thought she had been about to die. 
Tom listened quietly, still holding the woman’s hand. He told her 
she had been very brave and handled the situation well. He asked 
her if there was someone he should call to come and be with her, 
perhaps someone from her family. The woman asked him to call 
her husband who was out doing some shopping in town. Tom 
stayed with the woman until her husband arrived and shortly 
after the police arrived.
13
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
Helping someone in distress to feel calmer
It is important to know what to do if someone is in a state of pan­
ic or is experiencing physical reactions to a situation of distress. 
Speak to the person in a calm and unhurried manner and with 
clear, short sentences. Ask the person to describe their symptoms, 
and if he or she knows what the symptoms are caused by. 
Be aware that chest discomfort and shortness of breath can also 
be caused by physical problems such as a heart attack or asthma. If 
there is any doubt as to the cause of the symptoms, make sure the 
person gets medical help as soon as possible. 
Encourage the person to breathe in through the nose, and feel the 
breath fill up the tummy slowly, and then to breathe out slowly 
through the mouth. Reassure the person that his or her experience 
of discomfort will soon stop and that he or she is safe and nothing 
bad will happen to them. Explain that the symptoms will lessen, as 
they feel calmer and less distressed. 
It is important for the helper to keep calm if someone is panicking, 
and to understand that it may be difficult for the distressed person 
to become calm and accept help.
14
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
Link actions have practical results. This includes helping the person 
in distress to get information. This can be through psychoeducation 
or by connecting them with other people or other services where 
they can get more information. 
What is psychoeducation?
Psychoeducation is providing people with information that helps 
them to better understand their own behaviour and feelings, and 
those of people around them. 
See the IFRC PS Centre’s psycho-education materials for more 
information. Examples are What is psycho-education? Coping with 
acute stress and PFA for children. 
LINK
Link refers to helping the person in distress
•	 access information
•	 connect with loved ones and social support
•	 tackle practical problems 
•	 access services and other help.
15
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
Link involves connecting people to loved ones and social support. 
It is useful for PFA helpers to know what sources of social support are 
available in an area. 
Link actions also include dealing with practical problems and 
accessing services and other help. This could 
be, for example, contacting someone to come 
to be with the distressed person or helping 
the person with transport home. 
Referring for more specialised help 
Sometimes people in distress have complex 
reactions or are in complex situations. This means they need more 
help than you can give with PFA. It is important for PFA helpers to 
recognize these types of reactions and situations and know how refer 
for more help. Here are some examples of complex situations and 
reactions. 
Complex situations
Complex situations are when the PFA helper cannot provide all the 
help needed and has to refer and involve others. An easy way to recog­
nize a complex situation is whenever you need to call others for help.
 
Examples of complex situations are when:
•	 people have physical injuries that need medical attention
•	 people have suffered sexual and gender-based violence
•	 you are helping many people at the same time
•	 you are helping groups such as children, women or people living 
with disabilities, as they may have specific needs 
•	 you are helping one or more persons with complex reactions.
Complex reactions
Complex reactions are more serious than common reactions to 
distress. A person with complex reactions often needs referral for 
specialised help or other assistance. 
Refer to back page 
with template for 
referral information. 
16
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
Examples of common complex reactions are: 
Panic attacks and feelings of anxiety can make someone have a 
faster heartbeat, shortness of breath, and pain in their chest. They 
may be sweating more than normal, feel dizzy or light-headed and 
feel like they want to be sick. 
Anger and aggressive behaviour are common reactions to crisis 
in situations of violence, or when people have experienced immense 
losses. 
Self-harm and suicide. Self-harm is when a person hurts himself or 
herself on purpose, for example, by cutting or burning their skin and 
flesh. Suicide is when someone intentionally takes his or her own life. 
It is important to always take someone who threatens to harm or kill 
him or herself seriously and not leave the person alone till more help 
arrives. 
Prolonged grief is when 
someone finds it hard 
to accept and adapt to 
the loss of someone they 
loved. The grief then 
affects how the 
person lives from day to 
day and how they relate 
to other people. It is not 
an immediate reaction. 
It develops over a period 
of time. It can also lead 
to extreme feelings of 
distress when the person 
experiences new challenges 
or is somehow reminded 
of their grief. 
17
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
Sleeping problems are very common after crises. Many people find 
it difficult to fall asleep. Some people sleep more than usual and find 
it hard to wake up. If sleeping problems go on for many days and 
nights, it can lead to physical and psychological problems. Severe 
sleeping problems interfere with daily living, moods and relationships 
with other people. 
Flashbacks are when a person feels as if they are back in the moment 
of the original stressful event. Flashbacks often feel real and can be 
confusing and frightening. They are not a sign or mental illness. They 
are a normal reaction to abnormal experiences. However, the person 
may still need help to manage them. 
Harmful coping methods include self-medicating with drugs or 
alcohol, becoming violent or aggressive, or keeping oneself completely 
apart from other people. 
Certain factors can increase the risk of developing complex reactions. 
For example if the person: 
•	 	was separated from their family
•	 	thought they were going to die
•	 	was involved in a situation where the horror element was high
•	 	has had previous traumatic experiences
•	 	lost loved ones
•	 	has an underlying psychological disorder.
18
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
PFA for children
Children face some risks and challenges that are similar to those of 
adults. But there are also risks that are specific to children. These 
include losing or becoming separated from parents and caregivers, 
child abuse and exploitation. 
Children do not understand or react to stressful events in the same 
way adults do. Their reactions vary according to how old they are and 
how much of the situation they understand. However, there are some 
general signs in a child’s behaviour that show he or she is in distress. 
Examples are if the child:
•	 	has physical symptoms of not feeling well, such as shaking, 
headaches loss of appetite, aches and pains
•	 	cries a lot and is unable to stop
•	 	is very upset and panicky
•	 	is aggressive and tries to hurt others (hits, kicks, bites, etc.)
•	 	behaves in a way that is unusual
•	 	holds onto their caregivers without letting go
•	 	seems confused and lost
•	 	appears withdrawn or very quiet with little or no movements
•	 	hides or stays away from other people
•	 	does not respond to others, does not speak at all
•	 	is very scared.
PFA for children is also based on the ‘Look, Listen and Link’ actions. 
However, there are important differences to keep in mind. These 
are that children’s reactions are different and that the way you 
communicate with children differs according to their age. 
19
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
20
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
PFA in Groups – Support to teams
Many Red Cross and Red Crescent staff and volunteers work in 
difficult, complex and sometimes, dangerous environments. They 
support people through crises and give them practical help, under­
standing and emotional support. Volunteers and staff may be deeply 
affected themselves. They see pain and suffering because they are 
often from the affected communities themselves. 
PFA and support meetings are a way of offering support to staff and 
volunteers during and after crises. This type of meeting gives a space 
to team members to think deeply about what has happened. These 
meetings encourage teams to understand more clearly what has 
happened. They give teams a way of helping one another, for example, 
through peer support. The meetings also make it possible to identify 
anyone who needs referral or other individual support. 
When do you provide PFA in groups? 
PFA in groups can help after a team of staff or volunteers have 
responded to a crisis together. It can also be offered before a crisis 
event to prepare team members. Groups can use psycho-education to 
practise recognizing and coping with symptoms of distress. 
Why provide PFA in groups?
PFA in groups is a way of helping many people at the same time. 
It draws on the strengths and resources of the group members. 
It encourages everyone to be more connected, using peer support, 
for example.
How do you provide PFA in groups?
PFA and support meetings for groups use the same PFA actions as for 
individuals: Look, Listen and Link. The meetings focus on how the 
group members are relating to one another as well as how individuals 
are reacting. 
21
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
Components of a PFA and support meeting
1.	 Checking how participants are doing
2.	 A brief factual review of actions taken in the crisis situation 
3.	 Providing information and psycho-education
4.	 Promoting self-care, peer support and positive coping
5.	 Linking participants with information for referral as needed
6.	 Ending the meeting by checking that everyone feels ok and 
discussing the way forward.
22
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
Do no harm 
Psychological first aid is calming, emotional support, active listening 
and practical assistance. It is not counselling or treatment. It focuses 
on providing emotional and practical support. Helpers do not need 
detailed personal information about the person they are helping. 
They do not need to have a full account of the distressing incident. 
There are a number of ethical considerations when helping responsibly. 
This is important when helping individuals or a group of people in 
distress.
Here is a list of Dos and Don’ts in helping responsibly when providing 
psychological first aid:
23
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
DO
DO NOT
respect privacy and keep the 
person’s story confidential
break the rule of confidentiality, 
unless you have very good reason to
give emotional and practical 
support
probe too deeply
behave appropriately by consider­
ing the person’s culture, age and 
gender
show disrespect or exploit your 
relationship as a helper
listen actively 
be distracted and think of other 
things while someone tells you 
something important
be aware of and set aside your 
own biases and prejudices
judge the person for their actions 
and feelings
respect people’s right to make 
their own decisions and facilitate 
self-help so they can solve their 
own problems
tell another person what to do or 
how to solve their problems
be honest and trustworthy
make false promises or give false 
information 
help people access basic needs
ask the person for money or favours 
for helping them
know when something is too 
difficult for you to handle
overestimate your own skills
make it clear to people that even 
if they don’t want your help now, 
they can still access help in the 
future
continue to press if the person does 
not want your support
end your help in a respectful 
manner.
end the help in an abrupt way, 
without giving information about 
further support and closing the 
conversation.
24
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
Looking after yourself
Helping responsibly includes 
helpers taking care of their own 
health and well-being. Helpers can 
be affected by supporting others 
in crisis situations or by their own 
distress. Providing psychologi­
cal first aid can be difficult both 
physically and emotionally. It is 
not easy interacting with people 
who are in distress. It can lead 
to feelings of guilt, sadness, and 
frustration, if helpers feel they did 
not do enough.
Helpers can apply the action prin­
ciples of ‘Look, Listen and Link’ to 
self-care:
Look
•	 watch your own reactions carefully
•	 recognize when your reactions are signs or symptoms of high stress 
or burnout.
Listen
•	 listen to how the reactions are affecting you
•	 acknowledge and accept your feelings
•	 try to work out what is affecting your reactions so that you can 
decide how to manage or cope better.
Link
•	 link with others. Reach out for support from others, either at home 
or at work 
•	 do activities that can help to protect your well-being. 
25
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
Personal protective factors
•	 belonging to a team
•	 finding work meaningful
•	 being motivated to help others 
•	 maintaining daily routines and structures
•	 being able to leave work behind and take a rest
•	 knowing there is support available, if and when it is needed
•	 being able to give support to and receive support from team 
members
•	 maintaining one’s cultural practices and beliefs
•	 belonging to a caring family or community.
Organizational protective factors
•	 regular meetings, which bring all staff and volunteers together 
and foster a feeling of belonging to a team
•	 an organizational culture where people can talk openly and 
share problems and respect the principle of confidentiality
•	 showing appreciation for the work of volunteers
•	 reasonable working conditions through policies and strategies
•	 providing clear information about how to access available 
support.
26
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID
Useful referral information
Use this form to write down contact details for referral services that 
you use in your local area. (Add other services that are not listed.) 
Keep the list up to date.
Referral services
Contact details
Emergency services
Police
Fire
Ambulance
Child protection services
Health services
SGBV help and support
A Short Introduction to Psychological First Aid for Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
 
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 
Reference Centre for Psychosocial Support
Blegdamsvej 27 · DK-2100 Copenhagen · Denmark
Phone: +45 35 25 92 00 · E-mail: psychosocial.centre@ifrc.org · Web: www.pscentre.org 
Facebook: www.facebook.com/Psychosocial.Center · Twitter: @IFRC_PS_Centre
Psychological First Aid for Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies was developed by 
the IFRC Reference Centre for Psychosocial Support. It comprises:
•	 A Guide to Psychological First Aid for Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
•	 A Short Introduction to Psychological First Aid for Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
•	 Training in Psychological First Aid for Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies:
· Module 1. An introduction to PFA (4 to 5 hours)
· Module 2. Basic PFA (8 to 9 hours)
· Module 3. PFA for Children (8 to 9 hours)
· Module 4: PFA in Groups – Support to teams (21 hours – three days)
Editors-in-chief: Louise Vinther-Larsen and Nana Wiedemann
Author: Pernille Hansen
Additional support: Wendy Ager, Louise Juul Hansen, Mette Munk
Reviewers: Wendy Ager, Ea Suzanne Akasha, Cecilie Alessandri, Eliza Cheung, Ziga Friberg, 
Ferdinand Garoff, Louise Juul Hansen, Sarah Harrison, Sara Hedrenius, Elfa Dögg S. Leifsdóttir, 
Maureen Mooney, Stephen Regel, Gurvinder Singh. 
The section about PFA for children has been inspired by Save the Children Denmark (2013) 
Psychological First Aid Training Manual for Child Practitioners. Save the Children, Copenhagen
We would like to thank Icelandic Red Cross and DANIDA for their funding and support in 
developing these materials.
Look, Listen and Link principles referred to in this guide derive from: World Health Organization, 
War Trauma Foundation and World Vision International (2011). Psychological first aid: Guide 
for field workers. WHO: Geneva.
Production: Pernille Hansen · Design: Michael Mossefin/Paramedia/12007  
Illustrations: Rod Shaw/International Federation · Print: KLS PurePrint, Hvidovre, Denmark
Front page photo: Benjamin Suomela/Finnish Red Cross
ISBN: (print): 978-87-92490-54-4. (online): 978-87-92490-60-5
Suggested citation: A Short Introduction to Psychological First Aid for Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Societies, IFRC Reference Centre for Psychosocial Support, Copenhagen, 2019.
Please contact the IFRC Reference Centre for Psychosocial Support if you wish to translate, or 
adapt any part of Psychological First Aid for the Red Cross Red Crescent Societies. We welcome 
your comments, suggestions and feedback at: psychosocial.centre@ifrc.org
The IFRC Reference Centre for Psychosocial Support is hosted and supported by Danish Red Cross
© International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies Reference Centre for 
Psychosocial Support 2019
Psychological First Aid 
For Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
Psychological first aid is a simple, yet powerful 
way of helping someone in distress. It involves 
paying attention to the person’s reactions, active 
listening and if relevant, practical assistance 
to help address immediate problems and basic needs. Learning 
psychological first aid skills and understanding reactions to crises 
empowers helpers to help others and apply the same skills to their 
own lives.  
 
Psychological First Aid for Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 
has several parts that can be used separately or together. It includes 
an introductory guide, a short booklet and four training modules. 
The first two training modules cover basic PFA skills, the third is 
on PFA for children and the fourth on providing PFA in groups and 
supporting teams. 
 
We hope these materials will support staff and volunteers in their 
primary work of helping others. Our goal is to assist National 
Societies in offering the most effective psychosocial support
possible to the people they serve. 
www.pscentre.org
